The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Seventeenth Highland Light Infantry
(Glasgow Chamber of Commerce Battalion), by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Seventeenth Highland Light Infantry (Glasgow Chamber of Commerce Battalion)
       Record of War Service, 1914-1918

Author: Various

Editor: John W. Arthur and Ion S. Munro

Release Date: December 19, 2006 [EBook #20136]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SEVENTEENTH HIGHLAND ***




Produced by Robert Cicconetti, Jeannie Howse and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)









       *       *       *       *       *

    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Transcriber's Note:                                       |
    |                                                           |
    | Inconsistent hyphenation in the original document has     |
    | been preserved.                                           |
    |                                                           |
    | Obvious typographical errors have been corrected in this  |
    | text. For a complete list, please see the end of this     |
    | document.                                                 |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *




                           The

           Seventeenth Highland Light Infantry.


[Illustration]




                       17th H.L.I.

                THE GIFT OF THE MEMBERS OF
             THE GLASGOW CHAMBER OF COMMERCE.




[Illustration]




                     The Seventeenth
                 Highland Light Infantry
         (Glasgow Chamber of Commerce Battalion).




                  Record of War Service,
                        1914-1918.




                         GLASGOW:
DAVID J. CLARK, 23 ROYAL EXCHANGE SQUARE AND 92 UNION STREET.
                          1920.




EDITORS' PREFACE.


In compiling and editing this history of the Chamber of Commerce
Battalion, the aim of the editors has been to present such a narrative
as will provide a detailed but not overburdened account of the
Battalion's movements and operations throughout the years of its
existence, and at the same time give a representative impression of
the various outstanding events which have built up the character and
the traditions of the unit.

In accordance with the wishes of the History Committee, the narrative
dealing with Field service has been kept within the limits of the
Battalion's share in the campaign, and accordingly no attempt has been
made to give any picture of the relative positions of the various
other units operating with the 17th, or of the general strategic
import of the actions described.

The chapters dealing with the beginnings and home training, and those
general items in Part III. are founded mainly upon matter supplied by
officers of the unit and members of _The Outpost_ staff. The Roll of
original members in Part IV. has been gathered together by Lieut. and
Quarter-Master Kelly. The material in the section dealing with the
service of the Battalion overseas has been gathered from the following
sources:--

For data--the Official War Diaries of the 17th Battalion H.L.I.
preserved in the "Records" Office, Hamilton; supplementary notes
supplied by Lieut.-Cols. Morton and Paul and Major Paterson, D.S.O.,
M.C.; Brigade and Battalion Operation Orders; Battalion Operation
Reports.

For impressions, opinions, and descriptions--numerous and exceedingly
helpful literary vignettes from members of _The Outpost_ staff and
others, and from interviews.

The Editors desire to record their appreciation of material
contributed and help given by:--Lieut.-Col. Morton, Lieut.-Col. Paul,
Lieut.-Col. Inglis, Major Paterson, the Rev. A. Herbert Gray, C.F.,
Capt. G.H.R. Laird, Capt. M. MacRobert, Capt. T.P. Locking, Mr.
Cameron of the Chamber of Commerce, Lieut. and Quarter-Master Kelly,
Mr. Meadows of Saltcoats (for allowing illustrations and excerpts to
be taken from the diary of his son, the late Lieut. B. Meadows), the
relatives of the late Lieut. D.W. Hourston (for a selection of
photographs from his collection), and the following gentlemen
identified with the publication of _The Outpost_:--Messrs. A.M. Cohen,
W.S. Corbett, Mark Drummond, W.M. Dixon, A.G. Deans, W. Glennie, A.G.
Houstoun, J.L. Hardie, C. MacCallum, J. M'Kechnie, N. M'Intyre, W.K.
M'Taggart, D. Murray, J.L.L. Niven, F.K. Pickles, H.F. Scott, D.M.
Thomson, R. Tilley.

                                        JOHN W. ARTHUR.
                                        ION S. MUNRO.

GLASGOW, _May, 1920._




CONTENTS.


EDITORS' PREFACE.

I.--FORMATION AND HOME TRAINING.                             PAGE

THE NATION'S CALL TO ARMS,                                     13
  Declaration of War--Strain on the resources of the
  Regular and Territorial Forces--Kitchener's Call to
  Arms--Civic response--Glasgow Corporation
  Battalions--Meeting of the Chamber of Commerce and
  Resolution--Committee formed--The Technical College.

A BATTALION IN BEING,                                          15
  Attestation and enrolment--"A" Company from Technical
  College--"B" Company from Schools--"C" and "D" from the
  City--C.O., Second in Command, Adjutant, Company
  Commanders, and Staff appointed--Leaving the
  City--Government acceptance--Farewell visit to City.

ESPRIT DE CORPS,                                               19
  Traditions of the H.L.I.--the 71st and 74th
  Foot--Uniform--pre-War Establishment--Regular and
  Territorial Battalions--War Service Battalions
  raised--the allocation of the 17th Battalion.

HOME STATIONS AND TRAINING,                                    21
  Gailes--Troon--Prees Heath--Wensleydale--Totley--Codford
  Camp--Overseas Orders--Message from the
  King--Embarkation.


II.--ON ACTIVE SERVICE.

ON TREK,                                                       27
  Arrival at Havre--March to the forward area--Bouzincourt
  and Millencourt--instructional tour of front line
  trenches--condition of trenches--first casualties--
  Molliens.

TRENCH ROUTINE,                                                30
  In the line--Xmas '15 and the New Year--the new
  trench--"Standing to"--routine and patrols.

THE RAID,                                                      33
  The "Red" Division--in the line at Authuille--Colonel
  Morton wounded on March 21st--A raid postponed--carried
  out on 22nd--success of Lieut. Begg's
  party--congratulatory messages and awards.

A LULL BEFORE THE STORM,                                       37
  Preparations commenced for the Somme offensive--a
  complimentary shoot with "P" Battery--Divisional,
  Brigade and Battalion identification marks--happy days
  at Rubempre.

THE BATTLE OF THE SOMME,                                       39
  Spirit of the Battalion prior to the battle--zero and
  "over the top"--Leipzig Trench carried--flanks
  exposed--precarious position of the unit--great
  casualties--protective bombing posts--consolidation--
  Battalion relieved--Victoria Cross gained by Sergeant
  Turnbull--Roll Call.

A DIARY ACCOUNT OF THE BATTLE,                                 42
  Extract from the personal diary of the late Lieut. B.
  Meadows giving a wonderfully realistic picture of the
  July 1st Battle.

HULLUCH AND THEREABOUTS,                                       48
  Senlis--last parade under Col. Morton--Bombing raid
  north of Ovillers--Move to Bethune--1st Army
  Area--inspection by General Munro--depleted
  ranks--trench warfare about Hulluch--Cambrin Sector.

BEAUMONT-HAMEL,                                                51
  The attack--weather conditions--failure of artillery
  support--forlorn hope--break-down of assault--gallantry
  and sacrifice--casualties--Mailly-Maillet--Franqueville
  and Rubempre--Xmas 1916 and New Year--football and high
  spirits.

THE NEW YEAR, 1917,                                            53
  Bad weather--Courcelles--trench labours--varied
  moves--beginning of Spring Offensive--attack by the
  French--the advance--Nesle--condition of
  inhabitants--great digging work at Germaine.

ON THE HEELS OF THE ENEMY,                                     55
  The taking of Savy--casualties--patrolling--capture of
  Fayet--congratulatory messages--strenuous
  days--Canizy--competitions with the French--work and
  sport--Hangard--leaving the Fourth Army--Farewell
  message from General Rawlinson.

IN FLANDERS,                                                   60
  En route to Steenbecque--R.T.O.--the 14th
  Corps--reconnaissance of Messines Sector--heavy
  marches--Coxyde and Kuhn--amenities of Nieuport area.

OPERATIONS ON THE COAST,                                       62
  Enemy hurricane bombardment--enemy attempt
  frustrated--attack abandoned--visit to H.L.I.--
  sports--visit of Dr. Kelman--patrol work by Corpl.
  Wilson--listening post raided--departure for Adinkerke.

THE YPRES SALIENT,                                             66
  Passchendaele--gallantry of attack--casualties-- Hilltop
  Farm--move to Landethun and Yeuse--Serre Sector--close
  of 1917.

THE DISBANDMENT,                                               71
  Hogmanay--with the II. Corps--the blow--new army
  establishment--Hospital Camp--disbandment--the passing
  of the "17th."


III.--AN ODD MUSTER.

THE SPIRIT OF THE BATTALION,                                   76
  The Padre's tribute.

CO-OPERATION,                                                  78
  The 17th and the Gunners.

"THE OUTPOST,"                                                 81
  The Battalion Magazine.

SPORT OF THE BATTALION,                                        83
  Football--running--boxing.

THE R.S.M.,                                                    84
  Tribute by Lieut.-Col. D.S. Morton.

A REMEMBRANCE,                                                 84
  An echo.

THE COMFORTS COMMITTEE,                                        85
  The Ladies' Committee and Office-bearers--their helpful
  work.

MEMORIAL SERVICE IN GLASGOW,                                   86
  The Somme--Rev. A. Herbert Gray's text.

THE CLUB,                                                      87
  The object--Battalion Benevolent Fund--Committee
  formed--Hope of the future.

"E" COMPANY,                                                   89
  17th H.L.I. Reserve--19th Battalion--drafts--
  activities--Lieut. Col. Anderson, V.C.--78th T.R.B.


IV.--HONOURS AND AWARDS.

Battalion Honour,                                              91

The Victoria Cross,                                            91

Honours gained by Officers and others while serving
 with the Battalion,                                           93

Honours gained by original Members of the Battalion
  after being transferred to other units,                      96

List of Officers who were granted Commissions in the
  Battalion on its formation,                                 100

"Other Ranks" of the Battalion who were granted
  Commissions in the Battalion,                               101

Roll of Warrant Officers, N.C.O.s and men who joined
  the Battalion prior to 22nd November, 1915,                 102




ILLUSTRATIONS.


FRONTISPIECE.                                       _Facing Page_

THE LATE MR. MONTAGU M.W. BAIRD AND MR. JAMES W. MURRAY,
PRESIDENTS OF THE CHAMBER,                                     14

FAREWELL MEETING AT THE TECHNICAL COLLEGE,                     17

EARLY DAYS--A REST BY THE WAY,                                 18

H.R.H. THE DUKE OF CONNAUGHT, COLONEL-IN-CHIEF OF THE
H.L.I., AND COLONEL J. STANLEY PATERSON,                       19

LIEUT.-COLONEL DAVID S. MORTON, V.D., C.M.G.,              20, 35

ON THE SEA FRONT AT TROON--LEAVING TROON,                      20

MESS ORDERLIES (PREES HEATH CAMP)--"GUARD, TURN OUT"
(WENSLEY CAMP),                                                21

A PEACEFUL BIVOUAC (SALISBURY PLAIN)--RECRUITING MARCH
AT CODFORD,                                                    22

OFFICERS OF THE BATTALION AT MAR LODGE, TROON, 1915,           24

VISIT OF THE DIRECTORS OF THE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE, TROON,
1915                                                           25

THE BATTALION ON PARADE,                                       26

HAVRE--RUINS OF BETHUNE,                                       28

THE CATHEDRAL, ALBERT--BEFORE AND AFTER BOMBARDMENT,           34

MAP ILLUSTRATING OPERATIONS OF 1ST JULY, 1916,                 40

VIEW FROM BOUZINCOURT LOOKING TOWARDS THE LINE,                44

COOKHOUSE AT BECOURT--OBSERVATION POST, HULLUCH
SECTOR--WAR'S DESTRUCTION,                                     50

LIEUT.-COLONEL W.J. PAUL,                                      51

LIEUT.-COLONEL J. INGLIS, C.M.G., D.S.O.,                      60

TYPES OF SUPPORT LINE DUG-OUTS AND FIRST AID POST,             68

MAJOR THE REV. A. HERBERT GRAY--CHURCH PARADE (PREES HEATH),   76

PHASES OF BATTALION TRAINING,                                  77

"THE OUTPOST" STAFF ON ACTIVE SERVICE--ORIGINAL EDITORIAL
STAFF,                                                         81

THE LATE STEVEN D. REITH, D.C.M.--LCE.-CORPL. F.K. PICKLES,    82

MARGUS, THE MASCOT--ONE OF THE BATTALION RUGBY FOOTBALL
TEAMS,                                                         83

LIEUT. AND Q.-M. (FORMERLY REGIMENTAL-SERGEANT-MAJOR) JAMES
KELLY,                                                         84

MRS. DAVID S. MORTON, CONVENER OF THE COMFORTS COMMITTEE,      85

LIEUT.-COLONEL W. AULD, V.D.,                                  90

THE LATE LIEUT.-COLONEL WILLIAM HERBERT ANDERSON, V.C.,
AND SERGEANT J.Y. TURNBULL, V.C.,                              91




"_They ask a better Britain as their monument._"




I.--FORMATION AND HOME TRAINING.


THE NATION'S CALL TO ARMS.


Great Britain declared war on Germany on August 4th, 1914, and almost
immediately the combatant strength of its Regular Army was on service
and the great bulk of that gallant force engaged in those fierce
actions against odds which marked the early fighting.

The War Office was quickly alive to the fact that the Regular Army
could not cope in point of numbers with the Germanic hordes. On the
day following the declaration of war the Territorial Forces of Great
Britain were mobilized, and with a marvellous and inspiring unanimity
their members volunteered for Overseas Service. But even the addition
of these many thousands to our striking force was realised to provide
no more than a relief for the rapidly exhausting strength of the "old
contemptibles," and Lord Kitchener issued his great manifesto calling
the people to the Empire's help, and laid the foundations of a New
Army--Kitchener's Army--the finest and most disinterested body of
soldier patriots that ever stepped in a sound and worthy cause. At
once the patriotism of the country declared itself and the Nation
sprang to arms. The City of Glasgow proved itself second to none among
the cities and districts of the Kingdom in its answer to the call. The
Town Council recruited two fine battalions, the 1st Glasgow, which was
mainly drawn from the Tramway employees of the city; and the 2nd
Glasgow, which was recruited from former members of the Boys' Brigade.
Other institutions in the city were bestirring themselves in the
national cause, and at a meeting of the Chamber of Commerce Directors,
held on 3rd September, 1914, it was unanimously resolved, on the
motion of Bailie W.F. Russell, to form a Glasgow Chamber of Commerce
Battalion. Enthusiasm for the scheme was quickly evident, and no time
was lost in getting the matter put upon a practical basis. At the same
meeting of Directors the following gentlemen were appointed as the
Committee in charge:--Messrs. M.M.W. Baird, James W. Murray, F.C.
Gardiner, G.A. Mitchell, H. Moncrieff, W.F. Russell, A.A. Smith, with
Sir Archd. M'Innes Shaw as Convener, and Mr. John W. Arthur as
Vice-Convener, the former making Military matters his chief concern,
the latter caring for Clothing and Equipment. Mr. Montagu M.W. Baird,
the President, and Mr. James W. Murray, the Vice-President, did much
to foster the movement.

The Chamber of Commerce sustained the loss of Mr. Baird, who died on
October 14, 1915. Mr. J.W. Murray succeeded him as President and
applied that deep interest in all the work and welfare of the
Battalion which marked his services throughout the history of the
unit. Mr. Thomas Cameron, the Secretary of the Chamber, also in
countless ways contributed to its success.

At this stage the Council of the Royal Glasgow Technical College
approached the Chamber of Commerce Committee, and it was arranged that
students of the College would find special opportunities of forming a
detachment within the Battalion. This arrangement was found acceptable
in every way, and many students entered for the service of their
country under the colours of what was at that early stage known as
"The Chamber of Commerce Battalion, 3rd Glasgow."

   [Illustration: THE LATE MR. MONTAGU M.W. BAIRD,
   President of the Chamber, 1914-1915.]

   [Illustration: MR. JAMES W. MURRAY,
   President of the Chamber, 1916-1917-1918.
   _To face page 14._]




A BATTALION IN BEING.


No time was lost in bridging the gap between "Resolution" and
"Action." By September 12th, 1914, the work of enrolling recruits had
begun, and Medical Examination and Attestation were commenced under
the supervision of Colonel J. Stanley Paterson, Officer in Charge, No.
2 District, Scottish Command. Colonel Paterson did much for the
Battalion in many directions, and in a recent letter says:--"I have
never lost, and never will lose, the deep interest I took in the 17th
H.L.I. from the moment of its initiation, and the full story of its
doings will give me the greatest pleasure to read."

The Lesser Hall of the Merchants' House was for many days the
Headquarters of busy recruiting, and those associated with these
stirring times will long remember the enthusiasm with which the
enrolment was conducted. With the help of Dr. Beilby and Mr. Stockdale
of the Royal Technical College, "A" Company was speedily recruited,
and was composed mainly of the College Students. Colonel R.C.
Mackenzie, C.B., did much for "B" Company, enlisting in its ranks
former pupils of the City Schools, the High School, Glasgow Academy
and others. "C" and "D" Companies were composed principally of men
from the business houses and different trades in the city and
district. For a few weeks the men, living in their own homes, were
instructed and drilled in four of the Territorial Force Association
Halls. During the recruiting and the early weeks of the training,
Major Rounsfell Brown acted as Adjutant, and rendered excellent
service.

Kit was issued to the four original Companies, "A," "B," "C," and "D,"
on 19th and 20th September.

It was at first expected that Colonel Fred. J. Smith, late of the 8th
Scottish Rifles, might be chosen as Officer in Command, but for
reasons of health he was unable to undertake the duty. The choice
eventually fell upon Lieut.-Colonel David S. Morton, V.D., who had
seen much service, and was well fitted to fill the post. His volunteer
experience included service in the 1st L.R.V., the Engineers, and
various Commissioned ranks in the 5th H.L.I., ending, on his retiral,
with the rank of Lieut.-Colonel. In 1900 he served with the 71st in
South Africa as Captain of the H.L.I. Service Company. He was
mentioned in despatches, and received the "South Africa" Medal with
three clasps.

Major W.J. Paul was appointed second in Command. His service had been
with the Scottish Rifles (the 4th V.B.S.R.), in which unit he rose to
the rank of Major, second in Command. He retired in 1907 with the
Honorary rank of Major.

The original Officers in Command of Companies were:--

     "A" Major W.J. Paul.
     "B" Major J.R. Young.
     "C" Major W. Auld, V.D.
     "D" Major E. Hutchison.

The Regimental Staff included Captain D.R. Kilpatrick, R.A.M.C., as
Surgeon attached; Lieut. and Quarter-Master Slade; Regimental
Sergt.-Major Kelly; Regimental Quarter-Master Sergt. T. Keith; and
Orderly Room Quarter-Master-Sergt. J. Copland.

Up to this point the drill and training were being well pushed on. It
will be remembered that the extraordinary demands made on khaki cloth,
by the sudden institution of a national army, made it practically
unobtainable in these early months. A navy blue serge cloth was
substituted for making tunics, trousers and greatcoats, and these made
a neat and serviceable uniform. This uniform was issued at Gailes and
was exchanged for khaki in the following summer at Troon. The
Battalion was now ready to set out for its war training station, and
on 23rd September assembled in the Examination Hall of the Royal
Technical College, and had a good send-off by the Directors and
Members of the Chamber of Commerce, Colonel Stanley Paterson, and
other friends. At this meeting, Colours for the Regiment were promised
by Mr. Montagu M.W. Baird, the President of the Chamber; Bugles, by
Dr. and Mrs. Beilby, of the Technical College; and Pipes and Drums as
a joint gift by the Directors of the Chamber of Commerce and
Merchants' House. After the Meeting, the Battalion entrained for the
Camp at Gailes.

   [Illustration: MAJOR W.J. PAUL.]

   [Illustration: MAJOR JOHN R. YOUNG.]

   [Illustration: MAJOR W. AULD, V.D.]

   [Illustration: MAJOR E. HUTCHISON.
   _To face page 16._]

   [Illustration: THE FAREWELL MEETING IN THE TECHNICAL COLLEGE.
   _To face page 17._]

A member of the Battalion, giving a general impression of these
memorable "first days," writes:--

"We all assembled in our various drill halls. We watched and
whispered. Some asked, who is that man with the loud voice shouting at
us, giving us papers and getting us into what he called Companies. We
knew soon. Then they selected N.C.O.'s (acting) from amongst those who
had some previous training. After that we went away. The N.C.O.'s
stayed and took the bundles of papers, our pledged word to our king,
and wearily for hours sorted them and listed the names.

"Days followed when we marched and when we got to know our officers by
sight and to call ourselves by our Company name. Then came the day we
drew our kit and carried off strange bundles to our homes. We got the
magic words 'To camp at Gailes.' Then we were soldiers now. We paraded
by Companies and assembled in the Square and marched to the train. A
motley crowd carrying on our shoulders all manner of weird shaped
bundles. The crowd laughed and cheered us. Thus we left the City that
held us very peculiarly her own, her citizens and sons for the last
time. Henceforth her soldiers."

The Chamber of Commerce Battalion was now an accomplished fact, and
the following authoritative acceptance by the Government and the War
Office, linked it as an integral part of the Service Regiments of the
British Army.


                                    "WAR OFFICE,
                             "LONDON, S.W., _2nd November, 1914._

  "TO THE PRESIDENT,
    "CHAMBER OF COMMERCE,
      "7 WEST GEORGE STREET,
        "GLASGOW.

    "Sir,

    "I am commanded by the Army Council to offer you, and those
    associated with you, their sincere thanks for having raised the
    17th (Service) Battalion, Highland Light Infantry (3rd Glasgow)
    of which the administration has now been taken over by the
    Military Authorities.

    "The Council much appreciated the spirit which prompted your
    offer of assistance, and they are gratified at the successful
    results of the time and labour devoted to this object, which has
    added to the armed forces of the Crown the services of a fine
    body of men.

    "The Council will watch the future career of the Battalion with
    interest, and they feel assured that when sent to the front it
    will maintain the high reputation of the distinguished Regiment
    of which it forms part.

    "I am to add that its success on active service will largely
    depend on the result of your efforts to keep the depot Companies
    constantly up to establishment with men in every way fit for
    service in the field.

      "I am, Sir,
        "Your obedient Servant,
          "(Signed)    B.B. CUBITT."

On 7th November, the Battalion paid a return visit to the City of
Glasgow. The Battalion arrived and formed up on the station platform.
A word of command and away they marched into the streets, crowded to
the uttermost by friends and relatives. Hardly a cheer was heard. The
men marched between banks of faces, in a deep silence. What a strange
reception, surely the most impressive men ever had, proving what was
in the hearts of those that watched the men and how they felt for
them. Only when they entered the Square did cheers and the buzzing of
an awaking crowd break out. "We felt," says an officer, "rather
disappointed; but we knew what it meant." The unit was then inspected
in front of the Municipal Buildings by representatives of the Chamber
of Commerce.

   [Illustration: EARLY DAYS.]

   [Illustration: A REST BY THE WAY.
   _To face page 18._]

   [Illustration: H.R.H. THE DUKE OF CONNAUGHT,
   Colonel-in-Chief of the H.L.I.]

   [Illustration: Colonel J. STANLEY PATERSON.
   _To face page 19._]




ESPRIT DE CORPS.


It will be of value and interest to give here a brief survey of the
history of The Highland Light Infantry, which enshrines a record of
service and gallantry second to none in the annals of our Empire, and
to which the Chamber of Commerce Battalion was fated to add a page as
heroic and imperishable as any in its great traditions.

The Highland Light Infantry was originally raised as two separate
Regiments of Foot, the 71st and the 74th. What was to become famous as
the 71st was raised in 1777 by Lord John MacLeod and was known as
"MacLeod's Highlanders." It was a kilted regiment and wore the
Mackenzie tartan. It was originally numbered the 73rd, and under this
designation won early distinctions in India in the campaigns against
Hyder Ali and Tippoo Sahib. Nine years after its inauguration it
became the 71st, and after service in Ceylon and at the Cape it
received in 1808 the title of "The Glasgow Regiment." Shortly after
this the 71st entered once more the fields of war in the Peninsula
campaign under Wellington, and shared in many actions including the
storming of Ciudad Rodrigo, the siege of Badajoz and at Vittoria. Then
came their crowning gallantry at Waterloo against the flower of
Napoleon's armies. In later years the Crimea, Canada and the Bermudas
were added to their war honours.

The 74th was raised at Glasgow by Major-General Sir Archibald Campbell
with a view to service in India. The 74th also wore the kilt, but of
Black Watch tartan. Their record runs much on the same lines as that
of the 71st, and quickly they are also found performing deeds of
stubborn gallantry in India in the Mysore Territory. When the hour of
Tippoo Sahib had come, the 74th was the first to enter the tyrant's
last stronghold, but it was later, at the battle of Assaye that they
earned a fame which finds its echo to-day in the old badge of the
Elephant, which that action entitles them to wear. For long afterwards
the unit possessed the proud by-name of "The Assaye Regiment." After
sharing with the 71st in the rigours of the Peninsula, Canada and the
West Indies, the 74th saw service in the Kaffir War, Madras, and in
Egypt, including Tel-el-Kebir, where they were in the fiercest of the
fight.

It was in 1809, as a reward for their services, that they were formed
into Light Infantry, and were permitted to retain such parts of the
national dress as were not inconsistent with the duties of Light
Infantry. They then discarded the kilt and adopted the tartan trews
which still appear in the full dress uniform of the Regiment. The kilt
is now worn by two Territorial Battalions, the 6th and the 9th.

Subsequently the two Regiments were formed into one Regiment of two
Battalions.

The "H.L.I.," as all the world calls it, was of course present during
the South African War. They fought at Modder River, and though they
suffered severely at Magersfontein, continued to share in the
hardships of the remainder of the campaign.

At the outbreak of the Great War there were in addition to the 1st and
2nd Battalions, two Special Reserve Battalions (the 3rd and 4th) and
five Territorial Battalions, numbered the 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th.

After declaration of war, the 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th, 14th, 15th,
16th, 17th, 18th, 19th and 20th Service Battalions were raised,
together with the 21st (Territorial) and 1st (Garrison) Battalions. In
addition, the 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th Battalions each had second
and third lines, and at one time there were as many as thirty
Battalions in existence. These were more or less connected with the
City of Glasgow and district, and serve as an indication of the
patriotism and loyalty of the community.

On 14th December, 1914, the War Office issued an order that the
Chamber of Commerce Battalion was to form a unit of the New Army, and
was to be designated the 17th (Service) Battalion Highland Light
Infantry, of the 117th Infantry Brigade, of the 39th Division. This
intimation was received when the Battalion was stationed at Troon, and
was hailed with great enthusiasm by all ranks.

Their comradeship in the common cause, their keenness for practical
service and the _esprit de corps_ engendered by their attachment to
the illustrious Highland Light Infantry, knit all ranks together in
enthusiasm and determination.

   [Illustration: ON THE SEA FRONT AT TROON.]

   [Illustration: LT.-COL. DAVID S. MORTON, V.D., C.M.G.]

   [Illustration: LEAVING TROON.
   _To face page 20._]

   [Illustration: "GUARD, TURN OUT"--WENSLEY CAMP.]

   [Illustration: MESS ORDERLIES--PREES HEATH CAMP.
   _To face page 21._]

It was about this time that instructions were received to recruit a
fifth Company as part of the 17th Battalion establishment. As this
Company eventually became the nucleus of a further Battalion with a
parallel history of its own, it will be treated separately in another
chapter. (Page 89.)




HOME STATIONS AND TRAINING.


The Battalion arrived at Gailes on 23rd September, 1914, and this
event might be called the beginning of the Great Adventure. The war
seemed miles nearer as the light-hearted and high-spirited lads
stepped out of the train and viewed the rows of glistening white
tents. The large array of kit bags was in many instances supplemented
by suit cases, filled with surplus personal effects thought necessary
for creature comforts. The novelty of the surroundings, and twelve men
in a tent, including numerous belongings, did not conduce to sleep;
and the next morning reveille found all but the old soldier already
astir. The weeks at Gailes were spent in organising, and the efforts
of all ranks to become efficient were worthy of that spirit which
lasted throughout the existence of the Battalion.

The issue of something in the nature of a uniform and a few Drill
Pattern rifles raised hopes that the training was being hurried on. On
the 13th October, a move was made to Troon, where the good citizens
afforded luxurious billets to the Battalion.

In spite of the vigorous training that was enforced during the next
few months, and which stood the men in such good stead later on, the
social side was not neglected and helped to cement a great feeling of
good fellowship and understanding between the officers and men. It was
with mutual regret that the Seventeenth took its departure from Troon
on 13th May, 1915, and the memory of the stay in the Ayrshire town
will always remain as one of the most pleasant memories in the history
of the Battalion.

There is something very remarkable about the record of the 17th H.L.I.
when billeted in Troon. For though brain-weary subalterns spent hours
trying to balance their billeting monies to the satisfaction of
exasperated and exacting Company Commanders, there was very little
trouble in the Orderly Room, that pulse of trouble.

Here are some noteworthy facts:--

    I.--The Guard Room was always empty.

    II.--There were practically no men "crimed" for lateness on
        parade.

    III.--There were practically no "crimes" for being out of
        "billets."

    IV.--There were no complaints of rowdyism in billets.

    V.--There were no charges of drunkenness.

    VI.--There were only very few charges of pass breaking.

    VII.--There were very few claims for damage, and these on
        examination were more vindictive than real.

    VIII.--It was not necessary to serve any billeting notices.

These are a few of the significant facts that mount up to bring honour
to the rank and file of the 17th H.L.I.

The three troop-trains carrying the Battalion arrived at Whitchurch,
Shropshire, on the morning of the 14th May, and the men marched some
three miles south to the great hut-city on Prees Heath. This was the
first War Station of the Brigade, where the 15th, 16th and 17th H.L.I.
joined the 11th (S.) Battalion Border Regiment (The Lonsdales). There
the men found hut life very comfortable. The cleaning and tidying of
their new abodes kept them busy, and was carried out with the cheery
zest and whole-hearted enthusiasm so characteristic of the
Seventeenth. Full advantage was taken of the adjacent Y.M.C.A.
establishment, which proved an admirable Institution. The Concert
Hall, Refreshment Tables, Reading and Billiard Rooms, were well
patronised at all off-duty hours, and the men appreciated the cheerful
kindness of the attendants, who were voluntary lady workers from the
County houses.

Extended manoeuvres were impracticable in this well-fenced
agricultural area, so the training embraced much route-marching, and
barrack-square work, musketry, signalling, visual training, etc.
There were several trying marches in the scorching May-June weather,
to Clive's native district, Moreton-Say and Market Drayton, to Wem and
Hodnet, and to the beautiful scenery of Hawkstone Park, and Iscoyd
Hall. Football, cricket, hockey, golf and cross-country running
provided healthy recreation, while excursions to old-world "Sleepy
Chester," to Shrewsbury and into Wales were popular week-ends.

   [Illustration: A PEACEFUL BIVOUAC--SALISBURY PLAIN.]

   [Illustration: RECRUITING MARCH AT CODFORD.
   _To face page 22._]

In the third week of June, 1915, the 17th H.L.I. changed quarters from
the flat stifling district of Prees-Heath to the breezy upland valley
of Wensleydale, in the North Riding of Yorkshire. There is hardly a
level acre in the district, but this was a welcome change. Many an
enjoyable journey was made, in the intervals of Brigade Training,
northward to lonely Swaledale, south to Coverdale, across the Valley
of the Yore, to the prominent peak of Penhill, or to the beautiful
Aysgarth Falls.

The Infantry Brigade, the 97th, had the 95th and the South Irish Horse
as comrades for the training round Leyburn and Middleham, and Bellerby
Moors; and some pleasant friendships were formed with the Warwickshire
and Gloucestershire lads, and with the "foine foightin' bhoys" from
Cork and Tipperary.

On the 27th of July tents were shifted to Totley Rifle Ranges in
Derbyshire, where the preliminary Musketry Course was fired by the
Battalion during the next fortnight, with most creditable results. The
men made themselves great favourites in Totley and Dore, and at
Sheffield, where they received a very hospitable welcome at all times,
and especially on the occasion of a memorable route march through that
city on 9th August. The Battalion was given an enthusiastic send-off
at Dore and Beauchief Stations on 10th August, when entraining for
Salisbury Plain, the scene of their next training ground.

When the Seventeenth steamed into the station at Codford St. Mary, on
11th August, and saw the occasional houses peeping through the tall
trees, it was the thought that, after the bustle and stir of Totley,
they had indeed become soldiers in earnest. The Camp Warden
strengthened this belief with his assurance that no unit stayed longer
than six weeks in the Camp, and after that,--Southampton and France,
for the testing and proof of all that had been learnt so eagerly. As
it turned out, three months were spent at Codford--months of rigorous
training, of long interesting divisional manoeuvres, and general
hardening. The men learned to dig trenches quickly and well, for they
had to spend nights in them; to march many miles without complaint,
and fight at the end of the hardest day's march; to use Lewis guns,
not as amateurs with a strange toy, but as men whose lives depended on
their speed and ability. The mysteries of transport, and the value of
a timetable were revealed.

Needless to say these days of field exercises were not lacking in some
amusing incidents which seem to dog the footsteps of peace conditions
manoeuvres and which act as very welcome episodes amid the hard work
that such training involves. Towards the close of one of the
periodical manoeuvres carried out by the Seventeenth under the
critical eye of an Inspecting General a bugle had sounded and the
manoeuvres ceased. Officers grouped together and men lay on their
backs and talked. The General turned to one of the Battalion officers
who were now beginning to assemble round him, and said, "What was that
call?" He often did such things as this to test knowledge of detail.
"The Stand Fast," said the officer to whom the question was addressed.
"Oh! come! come!" said the General, "Now, what was it?" he further
questioned a Company Commander. No reply came. Then he turned to the
Second in Command, "Now, Major, what was it? Tell him." "The Stand
Fast, sir," said the Major. "Really," said the General, "you gentlemen
must learn the elementary things in soldiering. Bugler, tell these
gentlemen what that call was." "The Stand Fast, sir," replied the
bugler. The General hurried on with the conference!

At Codford the Battalion had its first taste of army biscuit and
bully-beef. From Monday to Thursday manoeuvres were held; on Friday,
"clean up," and on Saturday, after the Colonel's inspection, the
luckier ones went to Bath and Bristol for the day, or to London or
Bournemouth for the week-end. Friday was pay day--"Seven Shillings me
lucky lad," and after pay-out, the reading of the Army Act or a
Lecture on bayonet-fighting or tactics. Games flourished. The
Battalion football team played and defeated Bath City, and met the
other Battalions of the Division at Rugby Football, and invariably
won. On the ranges with rifle and Lewis gun, the Battalion maintained
its place as _the_ Battalion in the Division.

   [Illustration: OFFICERS OF THE BATTALION AT MAR LODGE, TROON,
   1915.
   _To face page 24._]

   [Illustration: VISIT OF THE DIRECTORS OF THE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE,
   TROON, 1915.
   _To face page 25._]

At last word was received that the Battalion would cross to France on
November 22nd. Only fifty per cent. got week-end leave--there was no
time for more. Training was over. Few will forget the brave skirl of
the pipes as the Battalion swung home in the morning from Yarnbury
Castle, file after file silhouetted against the orange and gold of the
rising sun. Always, when the wind blows fresh and sweet in the
morning, those who are left of those happy times will think of
Codford, the "jumping off place" of the Seventeenth for France.

The following message of God-speed and goodwill was received by the
Battalion as part of the 32nd Division before setting out:--


    "17TH SERVICE BATTALION HIGHLAND LIGHT INFANTRY.
      "BRIGADE ORDER NO. 1285, OF 19TH NOVEMBER, 1915.
        "MESSAGE FROM HIS MAJESTY THE KING.

    "Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers and Men of the 32nd
    Division, on the eve of your departure for Active Service I send
    you my heartfelt good wishes.

    "It is a bitter disappointment to me, owing to an unfortunate
    accident, I am unable to see the Division on Parade before it
    leaves England; but I can assure you that my thoughts are with
    you all.

    "Your period of training has been long and arduous, but the time
    has now come for you to prove on the Field of Battle the results
    of your instruction.

    "From the good accounts that I have received of the Division, I
    am confident that the high traditions of the British Army are
    safe in your hands, and that with your comrades now in the Field
    you will maintain the unceasing efforts necessary to bring the
    War to a victorious ending.

    "Good-bye and God-speed."

To the above message the following reply was sent:--

    "Please convey to His Majesty the heartfelt thanks of all ranks
    of the 32nd Division for His gracious message and their
    determination to justify His expectations.

    "The Division deeply regrets the accident which has deprived it
    of the honour of a visit from His Majesty, and humbly offers its
    best wishes for His Majesty's speedy and complete recovery."

On Sunday, 21st November, 1915, the Battalion paraded in full
strength, 1,032 all ranks, at their hutments, Codford. A minute and
final inspection was made, and everything pronounced to be in order. A
memorable feature of this parade was the head-gear, Balmoral bonnets
of the war service pattern being worn for the first time. Next morning
the Battalion left Codford in three parties for Southampton, and
without any delay embarked on two transports for Havre, the remainder
of the Division going _via_ Boulogne. It was a perfect crossing, no
wind, bright moonlight, with everyone in the best of spirits.

At 7 a.m. on the 23rd, the troops disembarked at the port of Havre and
marched off at once to the Rest Camp, three miles away, great interest
being displayed in the few German prisoners working on the docks. On
arrival the Battalion found it was under canvas, no floor boards and
plenty of mud--a first taste of real discomfort. Moreover the day was
raw, with a suspicion of snow, and no one was sorry when it was
announced that the Camp was being left first thing in the morning.
That evening a few of the Officers visited the town itself, and others
went out on a first reconnaissance to discover the route to the
station, and the Ration Depot.

The next day, after drawing two days' rations as well as "Iron
Rations," the Battalion left for the "Front,"--"A," "B," and "C"
Companies going off at 1.15 p.m., and "D" Company following a few
hours later.

   [Illustration: CHAMBER OF COMMERCE BATTALION, TROON, APRIL,
   1915.]




II.--ACTIVE SERVICE.


ON TREK.

    _Arrival at Havre--March to the forward area--Bouzincourt and
    Millencourt--instructional tour of front line
    trenches--condition of trenches--first casualties--Molliens._


The Battalion arrived at the Port of Le Havre, disembarked in high
spirits, and in the morning of 23rd November, 1915, part of the troops
left the docks for a three mile trek to a rest camp; but soon the
Battalion set out on its first journey "up the line" in cattle trucks.
Travelling through the night of the 24th, via Rouen and Amiens, the
unit reached Pont Remy, some twelve miles east of Abbeville, in the
early hours of the following day, and soon had commenced their first
route march into the battle-ways of France, and, incidentally, at the
first resting place, Mouflers, made cheerily light of what was their
first experience of faulty billeting arrangements. One billet, for 150
men, at the Folie Auberge was uninhabitable, and the appearance of the
billets in general was greeted with good-natured growls of amazement
and disgust. The weather, however, was mild and sunny, and after about
eight hours' work all the troops were more or less under cover. When
every incident was an experience novel and suggestive, such minor
discomforts did not trouble anyone seriously; but considered in
retrospect it must be admitted that these, their first billets, were
very poor for a village so far behind the line. If it was an
unpromising beginning for the companies, it proved a delusion and a
snare for headquarters, for they scored on this occasion in having at
the Chateau the most comfortable billets they ever were fated to
enjoy.

The next day was spent in resting, and on the 27th the march was
continued along the magnificent Amiens Road, through Felixcourt and
Belloy-sur-Somme to La Chaussee. This was a day of keen frost and
bright sunshine, and headed by the band, the 17th stepped out through
the various villages in the best of spirits. Following the same column
was the 17th Northumberland Fusiliers and two A.S.C. Companies. That
night the billets were good, everyone felt somehow in holiday mood,
helped perhaps by the successful bargaining for eggs, chickens and
wine, for to make purchases at all was even at that early date a
matter for rejoicing. The pipers delighted with their playing the
heart of Madame la Comptesse at her chateau at Turancourt where
Brigade headquarters were stationed.

On the 28th, a bitterly cold day, the Battalion marched eleven miles
via Coisy and Ranneville to Molliens-au-Bois, and there they stayed
until the morning of December 1st, when they were joined by M.
Duchamps, interpreter. Molliens-au-Bois lies about eight miles north
of Amiens, but the outstanding feature was that, from the high ground
above there was got the first glimpse of the illuminations provided
nightly by the Bosche, all along the battle front.

On 1st December they left at 8.15 a.m., in company with the 16th
H.L.I., and on the way a Company of the 17th Northumberland Fusiliers
joined the column, which now was moving into the front area.

During the afternoon of that day, the Officers and N.C.O.s of "A" and
"B" Companies went from Bouzincourt into the front line trenches, just
north of Albert, and were attached for instruction to the 7th Gordons
and the 7th Black Watch of the 51st Division, and on the following day
these two Companies joined their Officers in the front line for one
night. The trenches were in a very bad condition after hard frost and
heavy rain. Parts of the trenches were collapsing under the severe
conditions and cases were reported from neighbouring units of men
being drowned in the mud and water.

On the 3rd and 4th December "C" and "D" Companies from Millencourt
went through a similar programme. On the 6th the front line only of
Sectors F1 and F2 were taken over, and then on the 8th the whole
Battalion took over Sector F1--some 2,000 yards of system from just
north of La Boisselle towards Authuille (Blighty) Wood. The front line
and communication trenches were knee deep in water and the trench
shelters were poor. Rats galore and of enormous size added to the
amenity of the district.

   [Illustration: HAVRE.]

   [Illustration: RUINS OF BETHUNE.
   _To face page 28._]

On the 4th of December the 17th suffered their first casualty by enemy
action, Pte. J.M. Harper, "A" Company, being wounded by a rifle
grenade.

The next day Ptes. A. Taylor and R. Cross, of "D" Company, were
wounded while bringing up rations. On the afternoon of the 11th, the
Battalion, having completed its course of practical instruction, was
relieved, and returned, two Companies to Bouzincourt, two to
Millencourt. During the relief the enemy shelled the position heavily,
and the Battalion was fortunate in escaping with only one casualty,
Pte. R. M'Kelvie of "B" Company. The next day the Battalion marched
back to Molliens-au-Bois, via Senlis and Beaucourt, to recuperate
after their opening experience of active trench warfare conditions.
The mud and water and the delapidated condition of the trenches were
indeed an eye-opener to the men, as much as the comparative absence of
"enemy activity." As they tramped back to Molliens, they passed some
Companies of the 15th H.L.I. en route for their first spell, and their
blank astonishment at the muddy appearance of the returning 17th
Battalion was much appreciated by the war-worn veterans!

All ranks received a good reception from the villagers, and the next
few days were spent in resting, inspections and training. Considerable
time was taken up in making duck-boards from the smaller trees of a
wood near the village until this exercise was stopped by the forester.
A few secured the grant of leave to Amiens, a privilege greatly
enjoyed. The work of the organisations home in Glasgow and the
interest taken in the Regiment and the men of the 17th Battalion soon
became manifested by the arrival of parcels to such an extent that the
postal arrangements were severely strained!




TRENCH ROUTINE.

    _In the line--Xmas '15 and the New Year--the new
    trench--"Standing to"--routine and patrols._


The Battalion returned to the line from Molliens-au-Bois on 23rd
December, 1915, and from then till 17th February, 1916, held the
Sector F1 alternately with the 11th Border Regiment. The outstanding
features of this period were the digging and then the taking over of
the new trenches across the big re-entrant on their right on 2nd
February, and the enemy raid on the 2nd K.O.Y.L.I., on their left on
9th February.

It will be noted that this spell of trench warfare activities brackets
in both Christmas and New Year--both of which were accordingly spent
in the front line trenches. As far as possible Christmas fare was
provided in the line, and strict orders were issued that if the enemy
made any friendly offers they were to be rejected strenuously. The
only exchange of greetings notified for Christmas and New Year in the
Official War Diary of the Battalion is a brief record of shelling and
machine gunning. But during this period the Battalion had nevertheless
very few casualties--only seven killed, including two died of wounds.
The first casualty was Corporal Houston of No. 16 Platoon, who was
killed at Lower Donnet on 3rd January.

Except for patrol work, the piece of work carried out on 2nd February,
1916, in connection with the new trenches was the first military
operation carried out by the 17th when in close touch with the enemy,
and it was confined to "B" Company and a Platoon of "A" Company, who
acted as covering party.

For some time the Battalion had been exercised in night manoeuvres,
and on 1st February they had a full-dress rehearsal of the impending
operation, which, on Tuesday, 2nd February, came off sooner than had
been anticipated. The scheme was to form a new line of trenches,
protected by wire, nearer the German line, some 300 yards in front of
the existing one, the length dug being about 600 yards, with
communication trenches in addition.

At 6 p.m., in pitch darkness, "B" Company filed out into "no man's
land." Instructions were, "No firing, bayonet only if necessary."
There were Hun flares and machine guns, but no search-light. Had the
enemy but used the light, all might have been spoiled. Their lives
depended on no Hun reaching their line, or getting back with
information. They went straight out the 600 yards without a hitch.
That fixed their right flank, where Major J.R. Young was in command.
Captain Russell led his half Company 500 yards straight across the
front, with two scouts on either side, checking. At every five yards a
man dropped and was placed, facing his proper front. They moved
slowly, snail pace, but only three times in the 500 yards had the line
to drop flat, until the last man was placed. The next thing was to get
in touch with "A" Company, who were putting out the platoon to guard
"B" Company's left flank. Rather jumpy work, this joining hands in
pitch darkness. It was a long, silent night. At 9.30 the tinkling
sound of the wire being fixed was heard, and they knew from this that
the digging had commenced--some 800 men, good and true, working
silently as they had never worked before.

When 1.30 a.m. came their time was up. The right half Company, under
Major Young, rose silently, and crept off to a place in the wire where
a gap had been arranged for the men to pass through. Captain Russell
with the left half Company followed. The wiring and digging went on
till 3 a.m., protected by patrols sent out in front of the wire. A new
trench, with communication trenches, had been laid 300 yards out from
their old line, protected by treble staked wire, on a frontage of 600
yards. The new trench was held till dawn before handing over. There
was no hitch, and not a man wounded. The Battalion would have given
much to see the Huns' faces when they looked across and found that
long line of serpentine earth and wire shoved out under their noses.
There would probably be some court-martialling of their patrols.
Everything worked in absolute harmony, and with perfect success, and
all got back safe to tell the tale. The Hun discovered what had been
done only the following morning when all was over.

The lack of the more strenuous forms of active service excitement
during the digging of this trench was more than made up for in the
week following--when it was manned nightly in full strength, in spite
of severe bombardment by the enemy.

After the successful and useful piece of work in advancing the line
just described, the Battalion settled down to a period of normal
trench warfare and intensive training, but managed to slip in a game
of Rugger and an Association game or two. Intermittent spells of
artillery and trench mortar and gas shell bombardments of varying
severity disturbed the sector, but despite this the unit not only
immediately repaired any damage done, but considerably extended and
improved the system.

On the 9th of February the shelling became very heavy, culminating
towards evening in an intense bombardment on the sector lying to the
left of F1. At the same time an attempt was made to neutralise the
fire of the British batteries on the Ancre by gas shells. Intense
excitement prevailed in the Battalion, which was billeted in Aveluy,
in Brigade support, when it was called on to "stand to" and man the
bridge-head defences. Meantime the Hun carried out a raid on a part of
the line known as the Nab, which was occupied by the 2nd K.O.Y.L.I.
This point was occupied for half-an-hour or so by the enemy, who
picked up about eleven K.O.Y.L.I. prisoners and then retired. The
K.O.Y.L.I. suffered some sixty casualties in killed, wounded and
missing, so "B" Company and part of "C" of the 17th were rushed up
into the raided sector to reinforce the battered garrison, and stayed
there till morning.

Again the conditions stereotyped themselves into that nerve racking
ordeal known to the civilian public as "nothing to report"--the type
of warfare recognised by all who have any experience of modern active
service life as calling for all that is highest in regimental
efficiency and discipline, and individual initiative and grit. The
weather, taking it all over, was wet and stormy, causing endless work
in repairing the line and pumping the trenches clear of water. But the
bright star in this bloody, muddy firmament was the commencement of
leave, which opened about the 14th February. Even if your name was
well down the list, or not yet even on it at all, a new species of
keen counter-attraction was provided to the demands of war.




THE RAID.

    _The "Red" Division--in the line at Authuille--Colonel Morton
    wounded on March 21st--a raid postponed--carried out on
    22nd--success of Lieut. Begg's party--congratulatory messages
    and awards._


On 17th February, 1916, the 97th Brigade was relieved by the 96th
Brigade, and consequently the Battalion moved back for an expected
rest of some weeks. The 15th Lancashire Fusiliers took over the
Battalion Sector, and the 17th went into billets at Millencourt. Many
fatigues were carried out round about Albert, the principal work being
the laying of cables and the improving of roads. On the 24th, quarters
were changed to Henencourt and from billets into huts in the
wood--most unpleasant, firstly on account of snow and frost, and then,
following a thaw, on account of knee-deep mud. But a further change on
the 29th to Dernancourt brought back billets good and comfortable.

The attack on Verdun had upset the plans which had been made to give
the Brigade the rest which it had been anticipating, and this last
move to Dernancourt brought them into the line once more, just south
of Albert.

The 32nd Division, by now, with good cause, had been named by the
Germans as the "Red" Division because the Hun was given no rest by the
Divisional Artillery and constant raids, and on account of the red
distinguishing marks worn by all ranks of the Division on their tunic
sleeves. The 32nd took over from the 18th Division, and on the 1st of
March, 1916, the Brigade was in Divisional Reserve. On the 3rd of
March, the 97th Brigade relieved the 14th Brigade, the 11th Border
Regiment and 2nd K.O.Y.L.I. taking over. On March 10th the 17th H.L.I.
relieved the 11th Border Regiment, and so once more they were in
immediate face of the enemy. This sector was in front of Becourt
Chateau, between Fricourt and La Boiselle.

A considerable amount of wiring was done, but life here was
comparatively pleasant and the return of spring much appreciated.
But, unfortunately, on the 21st of March, Col. Morton was wounded at
Albert, Major Paul taking over command of the Battalion.

Working parties were heavy, and on one occasion the Bosche blew a
camouflet while work was in progress. During this period great
preparations were made for a raid, and there was keen competition for
a place in the selected party. The night selected for the raid, 2nd
April, however, was unfortunately bright, and this combined with the
fact that the enemy, by means of listening apparatus, seemed fully
aware of what was on, led to a postponement when actually in "no man's
land." The hazardous work of laying the guide tape preparatory to the
abandoned raid was carried out by 2nd Lieut. H. MacRobert and Corpl.
J. Chapman.

This Sector was left on the 4th of April, and the Battalion, being
relieved by the 2nd Scottish Rifles, of the 23rd Brigade, 8th
Division, moved to Bouzincourt and went into huts vacated by the 2nd
Inniskillens.

After a week's rest at Bouzincourt the Battalion returned to the line
at Authuille, on 12th April, 1916, the 97th Brigade holding the line
between that village and north to Thiepval, with the two other
Brigades behind, in support and in reserve. Alternately in the line,
in support, and in reserve, the 17th remained in this Sector until the
opening of the Somme Battle on 1st July, 1916. But the period was not
without stirring incident. By the 15th of April final arrangements
were being made to carry out what was to prove a highly successful
raid on the enemy, which operation was accomplished on 22nd April.

"23rd April, 1916,--Last night we made a successful raid against the
enemy's trenches, south-west of Thiepval. Thirteen prisoners were
captured, and in addition, a number of casualties were caused to the
enemy by our men bombing their dug-outs. Our casualties were very
slight."

This bald official statement of the 17th H.L.I.'s first raid is to the
lay mind singularly unimpressive, but behind it there is an interest
and a measure of glory of which the 17th is happy to be proud. Let it
be remembered that it was their first "stunt," their first real hand
to hand brush with the enemy, and that to the 17th fell the honour of
getting the first "jab in" for the 32nd Division.

   [Illustration: THE CATHEDRAL, ALBERT--BEFORE THE WAR.]

   [Illustration: THE CATHEDRAL, ALBERT--AFTER BOMBARDMENT.
   _To face page 34._]

   [Illustration: LIEUT.-COLONEL D.S. MORTON, V.D., C.M.G.
   _To face page 35._]

It was on the 28th of March, 1916, that volunteers were called for to
raid the enemy's trenches, and out of the hundred who answered, a
party of 45 was selected, under Lieut. A.J. Begg, and Lieut. J.N.
Carpenter. This party went down to Dernancourt, behind Albert, to
complete the training for the raid, and the intention was to rush the
enemy on the night of 2nd April. That night, however, as already
explained, proved unfavourable on account of a bright moon, and the
party, after crawling stealthily towards the enemy's wire were
observed near his trenches and were forced to withdraw. Training was
resumed at Bouzincourt, and it was decided then to have the assistance
of a preliminary artillery bombardment. A point in the enemy's salient
south-west of Thiepval was selected, the wire there was cut in advance
by the artillery, and close observation was maintained on the spot
from day to day. Meanwhile the enemy's fortifications were duplicated
on the ground behind Bouzincourt, and there, night after night, the
raiding party practised the assault. The most careful preparations
were entailed, with much planning and understanding of detail. Every
man had to know thoroughly his part. There had to be no hitch
anywhere. Lieut. Begg saw to it that the training was complete, and
given any luck, success was fully assured.

On the night of the 22nd of April, the party, with blackened hands and
faces, and equipped with an assortment of weapons worthy of Mexican
outlaws, presented themselves at the head of Thiepval Avenue, and
filed up to the "starting point" to await the report of the Patrol
under Lieut. MacRobert, who also had charge of the tape-laying party
which included Corporal Chapman. At 9.30 p.m. our artillery suddenly
opened on the enemy's salient, and poured down on it such a tornado of
steel as the Germans had never experienced before. For twenty minutes
our shells flayed the German front line, and under this arch of
shrieking explosives the battle party crawled right up to the rim of
the bombardment. What wire remained uncut was blown to fragments by a
torpedo, and when the barrage lifted and came down behind, the raiders
jumped into the enemy's trench and set to work. For twenty minutes
they bombed and destroyed, cleared dug-outs, pulled down machine guns,
barricaded communication trenches, and handed prisoners back to
escorts. Then on a signal they as quickly withdrew, and still under
cover of artillery fire made their own trench again. Thirteen
affrighted Germans, of two different units, accompanied the party;
and, finest of all, every man of the party returned. Eleven of them
were wounded, but only one seriously. Among those slightly wounded was
Lieut. Begg, who was the spirit of the assault.

As a result of this success many congratulatory messages were received
and several decorations awarded. Among the list of telegrams were the
following:--

  From the G.O.C. 10th CORPS:--"Corps Commander congratulates the
      17th H.L.I. on their successful enterprise, which reflects
      great credit on all concerned."

  From the G.O.C. 32nd DIVISION:--"I congratulate you. I was
      confident that the 17th H.L.I. would do the trick. Convey this
      message to them."

  From Sir HENRY RAWLINSON, G.O.C. 4th ARMY:--"Please convey to 32nd
      Division, and particularly to the 97th Brigade and 17th
      Battalion Highland Light Infantry, my heartiest
      congratulations on their successful raid last night. The
      preparations were well and carefully thought out, the
      Artillery support was good, and the whole conduct of the
      operations reflects credit on all concerned."

  From the G.O.C. 97th INFANTRY BRIGADE:--"Commander-in-Chief has
      awarded the following decorations:--Lieut. Begg, and 2nd Lieut
      Carpenter, Military Cross; 15507 Sergt.-Major Reith, D.C.M.;
      15458 Sergeant Taylor, 2797 Private Leiper and 15720 Private
      M'Intosh, Military Medal. All 17th H.L.I. Major-General
      Rycroft offers his heartiest congratulations to above
      officers, N.C.O.s and men on their decorations. Letter with
      authority following."

The Battalion had three men killed and four wounded during enemy
retaliation, but any serious effort by the enemy was checked, and on
the 24th the unit went into reserve billets at Bouzincourt.




A LULL BEFORE THE STORM.

    _Preparations commenced for the Somme offensive--a complimentary
    shoot with "P" Battery--Divisional, Brigade and Battalion
    identification marks--happy days at Rubempre._


On 27th April, in brilliant summer weather, the Commanding Officer,
Company Commanders, the Intelligence Officer and four N.C.O.s per
Company attended a Divisional Exercise at Baizieux, and this was the
start of those preparations which were to culminate in the Battle of
the Somme on 1st July.

On 3rd May the Colonel returned and took over command from Major Paul,
and during the following day, Major Lawder, Commanding "A" Battery,
168th Brigade, R.F.A., entertained those who had taken part in the
raid and allowed them to fire the guns which had rendered such fine
support during the sortie.

Identification marks had now been issued for some time for major
operations pending. The Divisional colours were crimson and the sleeve
mark was a red circle for the 97th Brigade. The K.O.Y.L.I. had one bar
below the circle; the Border Regiment, two; the 16th H.L.I., three;
and the 17th, four bars, worn horizontally and parallel. Runners,
bombers, etc., had further identification marks. Prior to this, from
November 1915, to April, 1916, no distinctive mark had been worn on
the sleeve, but on the centre of the tunic collar at the back there
was worn a strip of ribbon coloured yellow, pale blue, and yellow.
During the succeeding period, up to the disbandment of the Battalion,
the sleeve marks were used only. While the circle was always red the
bars were coloured respectively black for Headquarters; red for "A"
Company; green for "B"; yellow for "C"; and blue for "D" Company. The
Divisional sign on flags and limbers, etc., was a red coloured
intertwined double 8.

The weather was now very fine, and when not in the line, delightful
days were spent at Rubempre, Contay and Warloy, and strenuous days on
Divisional exercises at Baizieux in preparation for the Somme. From
this it will be seen that the Battalion was not engaged in killing
Germans all the time, or being killed by them. At times they had a
change. There were periods of rest. The word "rest" is very often the
subject of sarcastic humour amongst troops. "Resting" may mean
anything. It may be quite a good time or it may be worse than the
firing line. Too often it is simply an occasion of smartening
up--guards, ceremonial parades, saluting, and "spit and polish"
generally--in fact the things that can be indulged in to excess. And
very often a rest simply means preparation for a big stunt. But the
17th will remember occasions when they did have a real rest. This was
particularly the case at Rubempre. The weather was good, and they had
a comparatively easy time. They had about three hours' training in the
forenoons. Thereafter they were free. There were sports and games in
the afternoons for the enthusiasts. There were entirely successful
concerts and sing-songs in the evenings. It was a change to see and be
among civilians--to be welcome in the village houses--and generally to
experience peace time conditions again. This may not seem to amount to
very much, but it meant a lot then. And it certainly had a fine effect
on the morale of the Battalion. It was a sheer relief to be out of
sound of the guns, to forget the mud, the exhaustion, mental and
physical, the weary night watches, standing to, and working parties.

But such days passed quickly, and all too soon they found themselves
on the road again, loaded up, silent, thoughtful, on the way back to
the firing line.




THE BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

    _Spirit of the Battalion prior to the battle--zero and "over the
    top"--Leipzig Trench carried--flanks exposed--precarious
    position of the unit--great casualties--protective bombing
    posts--consolidation--Battalion relieved--Victoria Cross gained
    by Sergeant Turnbull--Roll Call._


Signs of the coming conflict were everywhere. The tremendous
accumulation of men and material had been going on unceasingly for
weeks, and during the long June days clouds of dust hung in the hot,
still air above the roads. For the roads all led towards the line, and
the tramp of men, and the rumble of wheels were unending. The
Battalion had long ago recovered from a hard and monotonous winter of
trench warfare. To each man there remained the joy of remembering days
and nights that were unpleasant--for it is a joy to remember, in the
comfort and happiness of to-day, the discomforts and sorrows of
yesterday. Now the sun was shining. Training was going on apace under
the pleasantest of conditions. They were a healthy family. Each man
felt his potentiality, and unconsciously boasted it in his every
action. Such was the feeling in the Battalion when the certainty of
conflict came. To everyone it was the "Big Push"--the mighty
Armageddon--of which all had thought and spoken during the winter of
waiting. There was no doubt as to the issue. Each man went about his
duties with an eye to an immediate and definite future. If anything he
gave greater care to his rifle. In his feeling the edge and point of
his bayonet, there was something of a caress. Now was the look in each
eye born of the lust of killing. It was the knowledge that on a bright
morning--now only a few hours distant--man would be matched against
man. "Justice of our cause may have been somewhere in our
sub-consciousness. Certainly it was not uppermost. To each man the
coming conflict savoured of individual mortal combat. The days of
waiting were gone. He was going forward to prove his manhood"--so
write two veterans of that fight.

The story of that morning is an epic. For every man it was the first
experience of "over the top." In sun-baked trenches everyone longed
for the zero hour, while the guns rolled and shells crashed with
ever-increasing intensity. Nothing was real. Men stood and waited as
if in a dream. They felt as if they were listening to the overture;
that soon the curtain would rise. Even when the guns ceased their roar
for a few moments towards the end, and in the death-like stillness was
heard the warbling of birds in "no man's land"--the grim reality of it
all was felt. With the lifting mist of the morning, the curtain
rose....

At 7.23 a.m. the Battalion started moving across "no man's land." When
the barrage lifted the men entered the enemy front line and the work
of the moppers-up soon began. The advance across the open was
splendidly carried out, all ranks behaving magnificently, as was the
case throughout the entire action. Leipzig Trench was taken and the
leading lines advanced against the Hindenburg Trench. These were mown
down and by 8.15 a.m. every Company Officer was a casualty. It now
became obvious to Colonel Morton that Leipzig Trench must be held, as
without reinforcements, no further advance could be made, both flanks
being exposed, as the 8th Division on their right had been driven
back. The left was particularly exposed and parties under Sergt.
Macgregor and Sergt. Watt were organised and sent to strengthen the
left where "B" and "D" Companies had been almost annihilated. It was
now 9 o'clock and the Battalion casualties now amounted to 22 officers
and 400 other ranks. The bombers, who had been sent up to replace
casualties, were holding the flanks successfully. By 11.15 the entire
line was very weak, and still at 2 o'clock in the afternoon the
situation was unchanged, 2nd Lieut. Morrison and 2nd Lieut. Marr
working and organising the protective flank bombers without the least
regard for personal safety. At 4 o'clock the 2nd Manchesters
reinforced them with two Companies. Just at this time the line wavered
a little in face of the overwhelming bombardment and the appalling
casualties, but control was immediately gained. At 5 the shattered
unit was ordered to consolidate the ground taken. This was done and
two strong enemy counter attacks repulsed. At 9.30 the Battalion
started to be relieved by the Manchesters, but the relief was not
wholly carried out until near midnight, although several bombing
parties had to carry on till well towards mid-day of the following
day before being relieved. The 17th concentrated on Campbell Post and
held the line in that Sector. In the evening of the next day the
Battalion was relieved and returned to dug-outs at Crucifix Corner.

   [Illustration: MAP ILLUSTRATING THE OPERATIONS OF 1st JULY, 1916.
   Objective of Attack--Mouquet Farm. First German Line attacked and
   taken, C--D. Trench Line from which the attack was launched,
   A--B. Second German Line taken and lost, E--F.
   Note the Salient C--D and its exposure to German fire and attack
   on the Flanks.
   _To face page 40._]

The first V.C., not only for the Battalion, but of the Division was
gained in this battle and was won by Sergeant James Young Turnbull.

The following is the extract from _The London Gazette_, of 25th
December, 1916, intimating the award of the Victoria Cross:--

            "No. 15888 Sergeant JAMES YOUNG TURNBULL,
                  late Highland Light Infantry.

    "For most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty, when, having
    with his party captured a post apparently of great importance to
    the enemy, he was subjected to severe counter attacks, which
    were continuous throughout the whole day. Although his party was
    wiped out and replaced several times during the day, Sergeant
    Turnbull never wavered in his determination to hold the post,
    the loss of which would have been very serious. Almost
    single-handed he maintained his position and displayed the
    highest degree of valour and skill in the performance of his
    duties.

    "Later in the day this gallant soldier was killed whilst bombing
    a counter-attack from the parados of our trench."

Of all the units operating in that ghastly Sector, the 17th H.L.I. was
the only Battalion which reached and occupied and held the enemy's
trenches from La Boiselle northwards. Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, writing
of the battle of the Somme in his history of the war, emphasises what
this unadorned record of the day's fighting bears out--that there had
been no flinching anywhere, and the military virtue shown had been of
the highest possible quality; but the losses from the machine guns and
from the barrage was so heavy that they deprived the attack of the
weight and momentum necessary to win their way through the enemy's
position. "In the desperate circumstances," he says, "it might well be
considered a remarkable result that a stretch of the Leipzig Redoubt
should be won and permanently held by the Highlanders, especially by
the 17th Highland Light Infantry."

Throughout these terrible operations Colonel Morton was present in the
most advanced positions encouraging and cheering the men by his
personal example and utter disregard for danger. In this work he was
gallantly seconded by his Adjutant and his Headquarters' Staff, who
were individually forward directing operations when all the Company
Officers had been knocked out. It is not too much to say that the
resolute spirit and example of the Colonel rallied the Battalion to
heights of endurance and endeavour which found their greatest
inspiration in his presence in the firing line.

Great work was also done by Captain D.C. Evans, R.A.M.C., who, for
over forty-eight hours, without interval or rest, attended to the
Battalion wounded. Throughout the action he carried on his task of
relieving suffering and saving life quite heedless of the shelling and
firing and quite cool in the face of the ever growing number of cases
demanding his attention and skill.

At the Battalion parade for Roll Call on the 4th of July, the
casualties totalled 22 officers and 447 other ranks.




A DIARY ACCOUNT OF THE BATTLE.

    _Extract from the personal diary of the late Lieut. B. Meadows
    giving a wonderfully realistic picture of the July 1st Battle._


The narrative of the 1st of July Somme Battle as written in the diary
of the late 2nd Lieut. B. Meadows, who, before taking his commission,
served with the 17th H.L.I., gives such an impressive account of the
battle that we include it here almost in entirety. The foregoing
chapter gives a general idea of the intensity of the great battle from
the impersonal and official viewpoint, with data checked and balanced.
But the following account introduces the personal and human element
with poignant effect. Some of the very minor facts are a little
inaccurate, but that is inevitable when an individual soldier
describes a general action from his own viewpoint. Nevertheless the
editors consider that in no other Battalion source is there such a
vivid record of experiences to be got which reflect the feelings of
all those who took part in the action concerned.

"The last four days before zero," he writes, "were known as 'W,' 'X,'
'Y,' and 'Z' days. By 'W' every enemy observation balloon had been
destroyed and so dense a fleet of aircraft patrolled the battle area
as to make it impossible for the enemy aircraft to approach the lines.
Thus the enemy was made blind. On the night of 'W' we got orders to
move forward. Before leaving the billet we made a large bonfire with
boxes from the C.Q.M.'s stores. On this we burned all our letters, and
round it we had the last sing-song the old 'Seventeenth' ever had. We
then believed it 'Y' night, not 'W' night. The night before we had
gone up to the trenches through Aveluy and Authuille with petrol tins
full of water. These were stocked in dug-outs and along the trench and
formed our reserve water supply. Many of our guns were firing 'gun
fire,' yet the enemy made little artillery reply. He retaliated
chiefly on the front line defences with trench mortars. Of such a
violent nature was this bombardment that the Lonsdales had to call on
our 'D' Company for support to make up for their casualties in shell
shock, etc. Curiously enough, during the days 'D' Company held the
line they suffered no casualties, although the trench was battered out
of all recognition. When it was dark on 'W' night we marched to
Bouzincourt. Here we spent the night in huts. Before daybreak we were
shelled and had one man killed. Day showed an extraordinary sight.
Bouzincourt stands on the hill, the battle area stretched out like a
map below. Near the Crucifix on the Aveluy road a long naval gun
barked. Just behind us was a 15 inch howitzer. Its shells could easily
be watched in their flight overhead. In front were an infinite number
of guns all in action. A long line of observation balloons made a
crescent round Albert. One could count over twenty, and not one
German. The air was thick with our aeroplanes. The German lines looked
like long ribbons of white fur. The air was full of shrapnel balls,
especially over the woods, and the villages were burning. The heavy
howitzers were causing dreadful eruptions on the German strong points.
La Boisselle, believed impregnable, was a concentrated hell. The
Germans were putting shrapnel into the woods that lie in the triangle
between Hamel, Bouzincourt and Aveluy. Here our guns were massed. And
now and then a mushroom of smoke would spring up in unexpected
places. The noise was so terrific that it became monotonous. We were
served out with cotton wool for our ears, but in spite of this the
concussion on the 1st of July was so great that we all became stone
deaf, and for days after almost without the use of our voices. We
prepared for 'battle order.' All our belongings we packed into our
valises, and these were stored in an empty house in Bouzincourt. We
wore steel helmets, at that time they were without sandbag coverings,
and in strong sunlight reflected almost as brilliantly as polished
steel. I noticed on the 1st July, looking back from the advanced line
to the German original front line, how the helmets of our reserves
holding that line shone up and made their wearers clear targets. We
wore the haversack on our back containing mess tin, small kit, two
days' rations, 'iron rations,' pair of socks and waterproof sheet. We
carried four sandbags just below. Then we had the usual equipment,
pouches containing 120 rounds, bayonet, water bottle and entrenching
tool. Another 100 rounds in bandoliers, and I had extra an apron
containing 12 Mill's bombs and butterfly wirecutters. The whole formed
fairly heavy equipment. In the late afternoon when we were all lined
up prepared to march off, orders came to cancel all orders. We stood
by for two days. On 'X' night the 16th H.L.I. sent a platoon over to
find out the condition of the enemy defences. Owing to an accident
they were almost entirely wiped out. On the following morning while
playing a football match the Sixteenth again suffered casualties from
a 5.9 which burst between the goal posts. In the evening of 'Z' day,
the 30th of June, we marched off by platoons. The thunder of the heavy
guns as we passed through their belt was almost unbearable, and nearer
the lines long lines of eighteen-pounders were giving 'battery fire'
down long rows of twenty batteries, sometimes all speaking at once. We
entered 'Oban Avenue' at the right end of the village of Authuille. It
was the 'up' trench for the advance and 'Campbell Avenue' the 'down.'
Both trenches had been deepened, in some places, to twelve feet, and
were fairly safe from shrapnel. The line in which we were to spend the
night had been blown almost completely out of existence and it was
difficult to find sufficient cover for the men. I and the bomber
who was next to me in the line found a corner and there slept for the
night. We were once disturbed by the enemy destroying a trench mortar
store situated close to where we slept. Daybreak came and still there
was no word of 'zero.' We made some breakfast, and about half-past
five word was passed along that zero was 7.30, and to move into battle
positions. We moved to the right until we were in contact with the
next Company. At 6.25 a.m. the final bombardment commenced. Every gun
was firing 'gunfire' and the rush of metal overhead was extraordinary.
The reply was feeble. At 7.25 we left the trench and walked over to
within 60 yards of the barrage. At 7.30 the barrage lifted and we
rushed the front line defences, destroying the garrison, in and out of
dug-outs. I have few definite memories from the time we first saw the
Germans to the time the machine gun swept us down outside the Liepzig
Redoubt. It became evident that we, who were working up between two
communication trenches, after two or three rushes, that further
advancing was impossible without support. We waited for our own
reserve waves and the Lonsdales who should have come on behind. But no
reserves reached us and we saw our only hope lay in the fact that they
had rushed one of the communication trenches and might manage to bomb
out the machine gun. But the bombers were checked out of range of the
gun. We began to work towards the communication trench, but owing to
the lie of the ground we were badly exposed and I at length found
myself the only living occupant of that corner. About twelve o'clock I
managed to leap the parapet without being hit. I found my platoon
officer, Lieut. MacBrayne, lying shot through the head. Of the others
of my platoon I could get no news, except those I saw lying dead or
wounded. Tom Train had completely disappeared. An order came up the
trench, '17th H.L.I. move to the left and prepare to support the
Dorsets.' The communication trench was at this time chiefly manned by
K.O.Y.L.I. (who should have supported the 16th H.L.I. who had been
held up by the German wire and cut up before able to take the first
line of defences. Those left were forced to retire to their own line).
A few Lonsdales (the 11th Borderers had been cut up coming up through
'Blighty Wood,' Colonel and Adjutant killed and all officers
casualties) were able to give us practically no support, and a
Company of Manchesters, sent from Divisional Reserve. I moved to the
left. An officer suddenly jumped the parapet and shouted 'Come on, the
17th!' I followed him along with about twenty others. But we found the
barbed wire impossible to cut through and he gave us the order 'Every
man for himself.'

   [Illustration: VIEW FROM BOUZINCOURT LOOKING TOWARDS THE LINE.
   (_Sketch from Lieut. Meadow's Diary_).
   _To face page 44._]

"Making my way back to the trench I rested in a shell hole occupied by
a Sergeant wounded in the leg. Whilst talking to him we both fell
asleep and slept until about 5 p.m., when the Germans counter-attacked.
Their artillery became violent and they attempted to come over the
open. We ran for the communication trench and found it disorganised.
Orders got mixed and some seemed anxious to retire. Fortunately the
17th H.L.I. bombers, who were in the advanced position, held their
ground, driving the enemy back with their own bombs, and the attack
over the open was checked by our brigade machine guns which had been
massed in the German front line. During the whole action we lost no
ground that had previously been gained. By this time our Battalion had
been badly hit. 'B' Company on our left had been caught in the wire and
cut to pieces by machine gun fire. My own Company, 'A,' was down to low
numbers. My Captain and my Platoon Officer were both killed, all the
platoon's N.C.O.s were killed or wounded, two Sergeants outright, and
all the L.-Corpls. dead. We had 17 officers killed and were working the
Battalion with two officers. The Colonel, who had been well forward all
day, was without a scratch. It was a remarkably clear day, very hot. We
were on the ridge that formed the defence on that side of Thiepval.
From here we could see the whole battlefield. I saw the huge eruption
at La Boisselle, when the six mines went up, and I remember watching
long lines of Highlanders charging along the opposite slope of the
valley. The aeroplanes followed every movement, flying low overhead and
directing the artillery by dropping flares. The Germans
counter-attacked in a half-hearted way through the night. We had
casualties from our own artillery and mortar batteries, otherwise the
night was quieter than we had expected. We managed to carry away a
number of our wounded in waterproof sheets. The battalions on both
flanks were unsuccessful in storming the enemy's front line defences,
thus our flanks were exposed and blockades had to be formed at the
front line and all lines forward to our advanced positions, which
developed into a series of bombing posts. Local fights went on at their
posts all through the day and night, and it was while chasing each
other round corners at the head of the communication trench in the
afternoon that we lost Sergeant Turnbull, V.C., who had done wonderful
work all day. The nature of the Leipzig defences, a maze of trenches
and underground saps, made advancing into the salient extremely hard.
One was continually attacked in the rear. What seemed dug-outs were
bombed, and when passed numbers of the enemy rush from them, they being
really underground communications with their rear defences. The whole
fighting was of a cold, deliberate, merciless nature. No quarter was
given or taken. One of the battalions opposing us was similar to our
own, a students' battalion from Bavaria. The enemy used explosive and
dum-dum bullets, and sniped off any of our wounded lying exposed in the
open. They were helped in their work by an arrangement we had come to
regarding wounded. It was not permitted to stop to take back prisoners
or to stop to dress a wounded chum; but it was permitted to stick the
bayonet of the wounded man's rifle in the ground and thus to mark the
spot where he lay. The Germans observed this and watched for any
movement in the heap beside the standing rifle. Men coolly fired at
each other at point blank range, and sniping became the chief cause of
casualties. It resembled a duel between two men who had had a deadly
quarrel--so intensely deliberate. On the morning of the 2nd of July we
handed over the front line of attack to Divisional Reserves and went
into support. At sunset we were relieved by the Cheshires, and moved
back to the dug-outs at Crucifix Corner. We had a number of casualties
coming out of action. We were given tea, food and rum, and went off
into a heavy sleep."




HULLUCH AND THEREABOUTS.

    _Senlis--last parade under Col. Morton--Bombing raid north of
    Ovillers--Move to Bethune--1st Army Area--inspection by General
    Munro--depleted ranks--trench warfare about Hulluch--Cambrin
    Sector._


In the sadness and stress of the first days after the Somme, there
came messages round to say the Battalion was saying "Good-bye" to its
Colonel. Worn out with fatigue he had been reluctantly persuaded by
the Brigadier and the doctors that if he wished to live and serve his
country more in the war he must retire from the dreadful strain of
command. In a field at Senlis, on the afternoon of 8th July, the
remnants of the Battalion, on their last parade under Colonel Morton,
were drawn up, silent and deeply moved. In a few words the Colonel
told the Battalion what he was going to do and all stood there with
their losses and their heartbreaks, hardly able to keep down the
tears. Addressing the men he congratulated them in warm and feeling
terms for their devotion while under his command and wished them well
in the uncertainties of the future.

Colonel Morton had started them, trained them, and cared for them;
fought Brigade and authorities for them; led them and loved them--and
now they were to lose him. He said little, for much of a speech would
not come, but he knew their memories and he knew what they felt. Major
Paul, on behalf of the Battalion, expressed the profound regret of all
ranks in losing the guidance and leadership of Colonel Morton, who had
raised the 17th to such a high state of proficiency, and to wish him a
well merited rest and all happiness. Just these few words of
"Good-bye," then they cheered him and, with a lump in their throats
they were not ashamed of, they dismissed. All said good-bye in their
hearts and wished him God-speed. It is sad to part with a loved C.O.
who, too, feels the parting.

Major Paul then took over command of the 17th and that evening once
more they moved into the trenches in support at Quarry Post, Authuille
Wood.

On the 13th July a bombing party of about 100 men were ordered to
attack the German Line, north of Ovillers, linking up with the
Inniskillen Fusiliers, and this party at midnight under Captain
Ferguson, Lieuts. Herron and Kirk and Sergeant Stewart, in conjunction
with the Inniskillens and a party of Engineers, carried out the raid.

The greatest credit was due to the initiative shown by Captain
Ferguson, in making excellent dispositions under very difficult
conditions. Owing to the strength of the German wire, a frontal attack
was impracticable, and after much thought, it was decided to attack
obliquely. The attack was most successful, a considerable number of
Germans being killed, while at least 16 were taken prisoners. The
objectives were all taken in a few minutes, but unfortunately the
raiders' losses were heavy. Captain Ferguson was mortally wounded,
eight other ranks were killed, and the other two officers and about 35
other ranks were wounded.

Writing of this incident, one of the Battalion officers says that
after the patrol had gone out those who were not taking part in it
heard the firing and the clamour of the small battle while they waited
eagerly for news of its progress. "News came in that the front was
safe, and proud of the efforts of our Battalion, we waited for their
return. The waiting was hard to bear, but the return sadder to
witness. They came back. On the right they had succeeded. On the left
they had died. A triumph and a disaster in one. On that small field
were left yet more of the (oh! so sadly few) gallant men of the
Seventeenth who, though exhausted and battle-worn, had in their own
true and fine spirit responded to the uttermost to the call for
gallant work. Later the body of Captain Ferguson was found right up to
the German lines grasping an empty revolver, far ahead in the charge
of even his gallant followers."

For this action, the Battalion received thanks and congratulations
from the Corps and Division. A counter-attack drove the raiders out of
the captured trench; but the object of the raid--to create a diversion
from a major operation on the right--had been successfully
accomplished.

This particular week, which was the last the Battalion saw of the
Somme fighting until later in the year, was one of the most strenuous
times which the unit had experienced. The available men for defensive
purposes were only too few and as new assembly trenches had to be dug
every night and all night, and also owing to the difficulties of
rationing and watering, the men were unable to get any rest.

The Brigade commenced a move to Ampliers on 16th July, and on the road
the Battalion was met by Lieut.-General T.L.N. Moreland, commanding
the X Corps. He expressed to the Commanding Officer his appreciation
of the good work done by the Battalion while under his command, and
his deepest sympathy in their losses. On the 26th the Brigade moved
into Bethune and two days afterwards paraded in full marching order,
including "tin hats," on a sweltering afternoon, to be inspected by
General Munro, G.O.C., 1st Army. A very warm day. Owing to the calls
on an Army Commander's time, this inspection was considered to be a
great honour and a mark of appreciation by the authorities of the fine
spirit shown by the Division during the Somme battle.

August saw the unit leave Bethune to take over the Cambrin right
sub-sector from the Northamptons, after putting in some fine shooting
on the old French Government Rifle Range at Labeauvriere. The strength
of the unit in the trenches apart from the officers, at the taking
over (August 5th) was 199--tragic testimony to the Somme. Immediately
on taking over the trenches they were subjected to trench mortar
bombardments and sniping raids. On 12th August Lieut. and Adjutant
Paterson became Captain and Adjutant, Major Paul became
Lieut.-Colonel, and 2nd Lieuts. Morrison and Marr, Captains.

The following weeks of August, September and October were marked with
much moving about with various spells of that sort of uneventful
trench warfare which is perhaps in some respects more trying on the
nerves and strength of a unit than actual operations. On August 23rd
they were in the Hulluch Section. In this Section there was a good
deal of mining going on and there were two big craters which required
special watching, but the Battalion soon set to and trained in
grappling hook work to be ready for any kind of crater fighting that
might be demanded of them. On August 31st a move was made to Annequin
via Beuvry and Bethune, and ultimately by bus journey to the trenches
at Guinchy left sub-section, and in this area the unit remained during
September. On the 11th of the month a night raid was attempted, but
was frustrated owing to the Germans bombing the party as it was on the
point of entering their trenches. Unfortunately the two N.C.O.s who
fired the torpedo were missing, and it is presumed that they were
blown to bits by the explosion.

   [Illustration: COOKHOUSE AT BECOURT.]

   [Illustration: OBSERVATION POST, HULLUCH SECTOR.]

   [Illustration: WAR'S DESTRUCTION.
   _To face page 50._]

   [Illustration: LIEUT.-COLONEL W.J. PAUL.
   _To face page 51._]

On October 4th the Battalion took over "Village Trench" in the Cambrin
Sector (Maison Rouge), taking over the front line from the 11th Border
Regiment. The next move saw the 17th leave Beuvry and proceeding to
Labeauvriere on October 16th; to Hardinval, on the 19th; to Rubempre,
on the 21st; to Bouzincourt, on the 23rd; back by Rubempre and on to
Canaples on the 31st via Talmas and Navurs. This treking was done in
weather that was oftener wet than dry, exceedingly cold at night, and
the living was under canvas. At Val-de-Maison on November 1st, the
unit moved to Vadencourt after a fortnight, and then into the
Martinsart Valley on the 15th, where they were ordered to go into
action at Beaumont-Hamel, for by this time several drafts had brought
up the strength of the Battalion.




BEAUMONT-HAMEL.

    _The attack--weather conditions--failure of artillery
    support--forlorn hope--break-down of assault--gallantry and
    sacrifice--casualties--Mailly-Maillet--Franqueville and
    Rubempre--Xmas 1916 and New Year--football and high spirits._


The attack which commenced at ten minutes past six on the morning on
November 18th--a day of ice-covered slushiness--was held up owing to
the insufficiency of the artillery barrage and the heavy enemy machine
gun fire. At 7.42 a.m. the message came in to the Battalion from the
right hand Company that the Company Commander was wounded and that a
Sergeant and about ten men were holding the right flank. The jumping
off trench known as New Munich Trench, was manned by the Battalion
machine gunners with a view to concentrating some of the Companies in
it back across "no man's land" to form a rallying point. At 8.30 a.m.
the following message was received from 2nd Lieut. Macbeth of the
right Company, "Am holding old front line with remainder of Battalion,
and have established a bombing post on the right. There are only
Lieut. Martin and myself in the trench." The left Company was also
being hard pressed. It was reported by one of the Battalion officers
that when the barrage opened a great number of shells fell just in
front of New Munich Trench where the attacking companies were lying
out, killing and wounding a large number of the Battalion. When the
barrage lifted on to Munich Trench for the last four minutes, it was
still short, and when the leading waves came up to about 50 or 60
yards from Munich Trench followed by the barrage, the Germans could be
seen lying in the trench in force. When the barrage was on the Munich
Trench, the enemy machine guns played on the attackers from both
flanks all the time. The failure of the attack was due to the
inefficiency of the British supporting barrage, together with the
condition of the ground--thaw having set in and rain falling on the
snow, making it exceedingly slippery--the targets the men formed
against the snowy background, and the intense cold.

Describing the attack one of the members of the Battalion writes:--"The
preliminary bombardment opened with its awful messages of destruction,
and the rapid reply of the enemy's artillery indicated ominously that
our intentions were not unknown to him. When our barrage lifted, and
the first wave of our men attempted to go forward, their dark forms
showed up against the snow. They were met by machine gun fire, by rapid
fire from the enemy trenches, and by snipers in skilfully chosen holes.
Our bombardment had failed. It was impossible to get to close quarters
with the enemy--hopeless to advance--dangerous to retire. Many of our
men were killed in the attack, others in the attempt to carry in the
wounded. Many remained all day in exposed positions, beside their
wounded comrades, in hope of rescuing them when darkness fell. Beaumont
Hamel will not be remembered by us as bearing any resemblance to the
official description. We look back upon it now, from the personal point
of view, as a touchstone of the individual soul, as a prominent
landmark in the vast monotony of death and horror--a chapter of
inspiring deeds. It represents to us the heroism of a forlorn hope,
the glory of unselfish sacrifice, the success of failure." 'Tis too
easy to despond "while the tired waves" visibly gain no "painful inch,"
hard to believe that "far back through creeks and inlets making, comes
silent, flooding in, the main."

On the 19th the Battalion was relieved and returned to Mailly-Maillet
where billets were taken over, and when the 17th rested and licked its
wounds--well over 300 of "Glasgow's Own" had either been killed or
wounded in that day's fighting. On the 21st of November General Gough,
G.O.C. Fifth Army, inspected and congratulated the Battalion, and
spoke to many of the N.C.O.s and men individually. During December the
unit carried on training at Franqueville and Rubempre, and that the
spirit of the men was not broken by the severity of their recent
experiences is shown by the number of football matches played during
the period. On Christmas Day, 1916, the officers beat the sergeants at
Rugby by 11 points to 0; in the afternoon "B" Company beat
Headquarters at Association by 4 goals to 0; and in the evening the
Battalion held a cheery concert. The Christmas Dinners were reserved
for the 30th, and on Hogmanay the New Year was welcomed with a
concert. General Gough attended Battalion Church Parade on the first
Sunday of the New Year.




THE NEW YEAR, 1917.

    _Bad weather--Courcelles--trench labours--varied
    moves--beginning of Spring Offensive--attack by the French--the
    advance--Nesle--condition of inhabitants--great digging work at
    Germaine._


The opening months of the New Year were months of battling not only
against a human enemy, but against the elements and the bad conditions
which they created. The winter of 1916 had been a severe one, and in
passing into 1917 it continued its course with unabated severity. The
Battalion left Rubempre on January 6th and partly by motor lorry and
partly in column of route proceeded to Courcelles where, on the
following day, they relieved the troops of the 3rd Division in the
trenches opposite Serre. The weather was bad, the enemy kept up brisk
attentions and the trenches were the worst which the Battalion had
ever been in. Most of them were absolutely impassable, being full of
water to a height of five feet, with the result that reliefs had for
the most part to be made outside the trenches. Owing to this condition
of matters, strict orders were issued for the prevention of "trench
feet," but notwithstanding every precaution, several cases occurred.

Heavy and continuous work was put in mending and bettering the
trenches, training the drafts which were arriving, performing tactical
exercises and battalion routine affairs. By this time several
ceremonies had taken place at which decorations were bestowed upon
N.C.O.s and men for bravery in the Field and gallantry in action.
Esprit de corps was stronger than ever, and the tediousness of trench
labours was relieved by the establishment of special strong posts, by
minor raids on the Bosche, and when out of the line by football and
such recreations as the circumstances permitted. This type of
campaigning was experienced during January and February at Courcelles,
Beaumont Hamel, Lyntham Camp, Mailly-Maillet, Bolton Camp,
Molliens-au-Bois (where on February 19th, 1917, Major F.R.F. Sworder,
Gordon Highlanders, assumed temporary command--Colonel Paul, after
being in hospital in France, having been sent to England where he was
appointed to a home unit), Camon, Wiencourt, Le Quesnel. And in March,
the approach of spring seemed to bring with it nothing but additional
storms of rain and snow, and the names of such points in the line as
Key Post and Kuropatkin will bring back memories of buttressing up
collapsed trenches and mending wire entanglements.

But the opening of the 1917 Spring Offensive soon gave a great fillip
to activities. The French attacked on March 16th and the 96th Brigade
attacked with it. The enemy was forced back so rapidly that by 2
o'clock on the day following the Allied artillery was out of range,
and the day after that again saw the whole Battalion hard at it
clearing wire from the road running through the enemy's old front
system, and setting out on the march, complete with transport, at 5 in
the morning. Arriving at Nesle on March 19th, the troops were given a
tremendous welcome by the French populace. It was discovered there
that the people were literally starving, because the Germans had
taken their rations for some days previously. A dam on the Somme burst
its banks and no advance was possible until this was repaired and new
roads made across the floods, but it was only a few days until once
more the troops were pushing on and the Commanding Officer and Company
Commanders of the 17th were making a reconnaissance of the new main
position at Germaine. The digging at Germaine on March 28th was one of
the heaviest day's work ever done by the Battalion. The job commenced
at night, after an 18 mile march in rain and finished in snow. The
digging was covered by the 16th H.L.I., who held the outpost line. The
newly dug trenches were shelled on the following forenoon.




ON THE HEELS OF THE ENEMY.

    _The taking of Savy--casualties--patrolling--capture of
    Fayet--congratulatory messages--strenuous
    days--Canizy--competitions with the French--work and
    sport--Hangard--leaving the Fourth Army--Farewell message from
    General Rawlinson._


The Battalion moved off from Germaine at midnight on April 1st, 1917,
and proceeded by Companies at 200 yard intervals cross country to
Fluquieres. Arriving there they passed through the village, a pile of
smouldering ruins, and on the main St. Quentin road and about half a
mile along it they reached Roupy with its destroyed cross-roads and
proceeded towards a point near Savy where the Battalion deployed, and
attacking at 5 a.m. moved forward, overcame the opposition and took
Savy. In the village the Bosche put up a desperate stand and some
fierce fighting took place before they were pushed beyond the railway
bank north of the village. Most of the fighting took place in the
neighbourhood of an orchard at the southern end of the village, and
here the 11th Border Regiment joined forces in helping to drive out
the stubborn enemy. Once through the village serious destruction was
caused by heavy machine gun fire from an enemy strong point in a mine
crater. With the aid of two Lewis guns, the crater was soon in the
hands of the 17th and a heavy fire directed on the retreating enemy.
Thereafter the Battalion started to dig in (about 6.30 a.m.), and soon
consolidated their gains, although subject to strong artillery,
machine gun and sniping fire. In the afternoon a further attack was
made by the 96th Brigade, and before evening Bois-de-Savy was in their
hands. The Battalion was relieved in the evening and moved off to take
up quarters in dug-outs on the Fluquieres-Douchy Road, but the place
had been so badly knocked about that a large portion of the unit
bivouacked.

The total casualties in this day's fighting was 103, 31 of whom were
killed. During the following week the Battalion suffered from the
severe winter conditions, coupled with incessant shelling and had much
to do strengthening their positions. On the 9th some magnificent
patrolling was done, for which the Battalion was deservedly
congratulated. In the afternoon of that day four patrols set out to
gain information of Fayet and the ground between Francilly and St.
Quentin. One patrol went to the ridge overlooking St. Quentin, one
went into a German trench near Fayet, one went within 300 yards of
Fayet, and the fourth reconnoitred the southern approaches of the
village--and much valuable information was accordingly gained.

On the 12th April, Major Lumsden, V.C., D.S.O., who was in temporary
command of the Battalion, relinquished that post, to take up duty as
Brigadier-General of the 14th Infantry Brigade--which this very
distinguished officer commanded until he was killed--and Captain
Morton assumed command of the Battalion, with Captain Paterson, M.C.,
as second in command.

While at Holnon on the 13th, "C" and "D" Companies were sent forward
in support of the 2nd K.O.Y.L.I., who were attacking Fayet. This
attack was carried out in conjunction with one being made by the
French, who were endeavouring to take St. Quentin. "B" Company joined
the others in the front line, and later the Battalion took over a
sector of the front line. After consolidating here, congratulatory
messages were received from Brigadier-General Blacklock, General Shute
and General Rawlinson.

The road from Nesle to St. Quentin is a long and cruel one, but in
these early days of 1917, it was to the 17th H.L.I. the pathway to
glory. They were sweeping onwards in the track of the retreating
enemy, with the glow of victory to strengthen their hearts and the
blessings of a delivered people in their ears. The echoing trumpets of
romance called to them from the Cathedral City, and their blood
stirred to the call. These were the impressions that led them, in
common with the rest of the Division, to surmount appalling obstacles,
natural and devilish. They soaked in the snow, and froze in the keen
blast; they starved and toiled on the way, but "stuck it," and their
reward was the fall of Savy village. There was fighting all along the
50 mile front just then, and Savy did not loom very large in the
chronicles of the time, but those who took part in its capture, and in
the taking of the wood a mile beyond, knew that they had achieved the
heroic. There was no resting; Francilly and Holnon were the next to
fall, and the men were within sight of the spires of St. Quentin. They
lived for some days in earth holes, and the weather flayed them
unmercifully. Then one dark morning, the 13th of April, they assembled
silently and lay down in the field, whilst dawn broke with singing of
birds, and the shriek and whistle of the barrage. The Division was
attacking Fayet, the enemy's last stronghold beyond the city. Before
they went over, grey and green coated figures were being brought down.
There were many other grey and green figures grotesquely contorted in
the brown ribbed fields, and those of them who had escaped from the
inferno fought it out intermittently, in the woods beyond the village.
But their sniping was braved for a few days more, and then one night
they staggered weakly back through nightmare villages to Germaine for
rest.

After resting at Germaine the Battalion set off on the 19th for Canizy
which was reached by evening. They found this village emptied of the
native populace and saw that the Germans had been carrying out their
usual work of destruction in the same wanton and deliberate scale as
in nearly every village in the regained area. A more cheerful memory
of this devastated village is that while here the Battalion got its
new bugle band. While stationed there the Battalion marched over to
Ham where a football match was to be played. Their march into the
town caused great interest, and they passed through a long line of
French soldiers and civilians who lined the roads. On their approach
along the main street, the square seemed totally blocked with a mass
of French soldiers, and a company of infantry stood at the "present"
as a Guard of Honour as they marched past the Town Hall, while the
French band rendered our National Anthem. After the Battalion team had
won their match by 6 goals to 1 against the 121st Infantry Regiment
and a scratch team had played a drawn game against the 408th Regiment,
the French band played the men out of the village. But the French were
not allowed to have all their own way of it with the music, for the
Battalion Pipe Band played to them and was received with much favour.

The regiment was in highest spirits, battle scarred and with a
glorious record of great achievements established. The Battalion
remained at rest in the village of Canizy until May 15th--that is,
they trained hard and played hard, went marches and were inspected,
performed innumerable fatigues and parades and carried out generally
that never ending programme of activities which always makes a soldier
smile at the mention of the word "rest!" The men played some of their
keenest and most memorable games of soccer here, and one of the
principle pastimes engaged in by the officers was hunting, until this
was forbidden by G.H.Q. The country, being entirely uncultivated made
ideal going. Major Campbell, in charge of Physical Training, G.H.Q.,
was with the 17th for some time, and put extra life into sport and
training.

On the 15th the Battalion moved off to Curchy, via Voyennes and Nesle,
and on the succeeding day to Rosieres and so on to Hangard on the
18th, where the "resting" was carried on until the end of the month,
when they proceeded to Villers-Bretonneux. Of the villages in the
regained area little or no description in the normal sense is possible
beyond the fact that while some semblance of streets could be traced
in some of them, the majority of them were simply masses of masonry
debris literally peppered with shell craters. But it was noticeable in
such villages as Nesle that the civilians showed a very marked
physical improvement as the result of better feeding and life under
British occupation. While at Hangard, Battalion Headquarters occupied
Hangard Chateau--one of the finest chateaux in France. (It was
demolished during the 1918 German offensive.) The Brigade concentrated
at Villers-Bretonneux prior to entraining for the Second Army.

But before leaving the Fourth Army, to which the 17th had given such
brilliant service, the following message was transmitted to the
Battalion as one of the Divisional units concerned:--

                                       "FOURTH ARMY, NO. G.S.702.

    "32ND DIVISION.

    "As the Division will shortly be leaving the Fourth Army I
    desire to express to all ranks my warm thanks for the excellent
    services they have performed whilst under my command. The
    gallantry and dash displayed by the Division during the advance
    in March and April, especially in the actions resulting in the
    capture of Savy, Bois de Savy, Francilly, Holnon, Selency, Fayet
    and Cepy Farm, reflect the highest credit on all concerned.

    "The skilful leadership of all ranks, coupled with the close
    co-operation between Artillery, Infantry and Aircraft, was a
    feature in these operations deserving the highest praise, and I
    heartily congratulate the Division on the successes they have
    achieved.

    "I much regret that the Division is now leaving the Fourth Army,
    but I shall hope that at some future date I may again have the
    good fortune to find them under my command.

                                "(Signed) H. RAWLINSON, _General,
                                     Commanding Fourth Army._

    "H.Q., FOURTH ARMY,
    "_22nd May, 1917._"




IN FLANDERS.

    _En route to Steenbecque--R.T.O.--the 14th Corps--reconnaissance
    of Messines Sector--heavy marches--Coxyde and Kuhn--amenities of
    Nieuport area._


The Battalion on 1st June, 1917, left the Fourth Army and the Somme
area. The 17th never again served in that area though it served again
with the Fourth Army on the sea coast. Entraining at Villers-Bretonneux
the unit journeyed to Amiens and by way of Abbeville, Etaples,
Boulogne, Calais, St. Omer, Hazebrouck to Steenbecque.

Owing to a mistake of the Railway Transport Officer an incident,
upsetting but not without its amusing side, occurred at Abbeville,
where the train moved off without warning while the Battalion was
parading in the station for tea, with only 100 all ranks on board. The
train calmly continued its journey and in due course arrived at
Steenbecque, the men who were left following on in the overcrowded
trucks of the 2nd Manchesters. Leaving the train at Hazebrouck, the
stranded party marched to Steenbecque, their appearance, owing to
deficiencies of equipment and in some cases even of uniform, causing
much interested amusement. At the latter station the first party were
picked up, packs and equipment donned, and then, in the afternoon the
Battalion accomplished a very interesting, though long and heavy march
to a small hamlet in the Donlieu area, where they billeted for ten
days or so.

The 32nd Division came into the 14th Corps, commanded by the Earl of
Cavan, in G.H.Q. Reserve. The 14th Corps was composed of the Guards
Division, 1st, 8th and 32nd Divisions.

On 5th June the Commanding Officer, with his officers and N.C.O.s
reconnoitred the Messines Sector with a view to supporting the attack
to be carried out on the Messines-Wytschaete Ridge by the Second Army.
The 17th at Donlieu "stood to" ready to move off in support of this
offensive, though happily the success of the attack did not
necessitate the Battalion being called on. Major Inglis of the 1st
H.L.I.--who had been cross-posted to the 2nd Manchesters, which
Battalion he commanded until re-posted to command the 17th H.L.I. on
the 20th of July--joined the Battalion on the 8th of June.

   [Illustration: Lt.-Col. J. INGLIS, C.M.G., D.S.O.
   _To face page 60._]

Donlieu was left on 14th June and the Battalion went in column of
route to Steenvoorde, in which area they were billeted. This was one
of the most trying marches they had experienced, and a large number of
men fell out. In 6 hours the unit had covered 24 kilometres which, in
full marching order, was a most difficult and wearisome performance.
On the 16th the Battalion embussed outside Steenvoorde, and after
leaving the charabancs at Petite Synthe, they marched to billets at
Mardyck. Hereabouts was pleasant country with excellent sea bathing.
Petite Synthe was left on the 19th for Dunkirk where they entrained
and proceeded east along the sand dunes to Coxyde and, on the
following day, into the coastal camp of Kuhn. Coxyde and Kuhn were
French built camps and very good, with vegetable gardens attached to
them.

Until 10th July the Battalion stayed in this vicinity, and despite
spells of shelling, trench mortar and aerial bombardments,
considerable patrolling and wiring work, the stay on the sand dunes
about Nieuport was heaven after the endless mud and horror of the
winter on the Somme. The very mention of Nieuport to a man who was
there in the first week of July, 1917, makes a marked impression on
his countenance. Since detraining at Coxyde on 20th June, things had
been comparatively quiet and the weather ideal. Working parties were
supplied for the roads during the day and smaller parties were engaged
on the breastworks in the front line at night. The quietness was
absolutely awful. But the presence of civilians in Oost Dunkirk and
Les Bains gave an air of security and quietude to the place which was
very soothing to the heart of the soldier. It is true that aerial
activity was disquieting at times, but several successful attacks on
the "Vultures of the Kaiser" made these items of interest, rather than
causes of alarm. The Germans seemed to pay greater attention to
something well on the left of the Battalion and towards the sea, than
to anything that concerned them particularly. The appearance of the
roads from Oost Dunkirk to Nieuport was most assuring and their great
beauty and undisturbed tranquillity were all that could be desired.

A large amount of work was attempted during this period on the Brigade
Front, in order to obtain sufficient cover for protection against
retaliation after our artillery bombardments began, prior to an
intended attack on the sea-coast by the 4th Army, in conjunction with
the 5th and 2nd Armies from Ypres. The enemy, before our artillery
came in, greatly increased his artillery force, and daily destroyed
any work done by night. These destructive shoots were afterwards found
to be part of his barrage programme for the attack on the 10th July.




OPERATIONS ON THE COAST.

    _Enemy hurricane bombardment--enemy attempt frustrated--attack
    abandoned--visit to H.L.I.--sports--visit of Dr. Kelman--patrol
    work by Corpl. Wilson--listening post raided--departure for
    Adinkerke._


The Battalion continued to carry out its duties on the Belgian Coast
until relieved from that Sector on October 5th, 1917. In the previous
chapter some idea of the general conditions has been given. And the
period which followed was of somewhat like nature with intermittent
outstanding excursions and alarms and with memorable pleasant episodes
to intermix with those more combative, and in this chapter the
outstanding features will be recorded without following the movements
of the Battalion to the various points in this sand-dune sector.

The comparatively routine behaviour of the daily aerial and artillery
"strafe" broke into a brisk and heavy bombardment on the Division to
the left on the night of July 9th, but on the 10th about five o'clock
in the morning this heavy fire switched on to the trenches from the
border of the sea to Nieuport. The bombardment crashed on to all
lines, firing, reserve, and rear. It got heavier and heavier and soon
reached an unprecedented violence and extended to the flanking
Divisions as well. The British guns replied, but could not force the
hostile fire to slacken, and in the evening the enemy came on in
attack. They carried the trenches of the units on the left and
patrols were put out and the flank strengthened. This was the
severest bombardment the Battalion had ever been in. It was a
hurricane onslaught. The 17th knew that sort. They had been through
it. Positions were taken and held, where no trench afforded cover, and
where breastworks were blown away.

The 17th were ordered to send three Companies in support of the Border
Regiment who were being hard pressed east of the Yser. "A," "B" and
"C" Companies were despatched on this mission. These Companies
experienced very stiff fighting throughout the night of the 10-11th,
until relieved early in the morning of the 11th by the Northumberland
Fusiliers.

On the following day the bombardment slackened a little, though during
the night hurricane fire broke out, and over the period of this attack
the Hun used a very large number of tear gas shells--which at that
time was a new horror introduced to the sufferings of the British
armies. Who will forget the Redans, Le Grand and Le Petit, the Bridges
Putney and Pelican? The last named was renewed or rebuilt on the
average three times every twenty-four hours. No words can describe
what took place between the 10th and 13th of that awful month. The
Germans, expecting an attack, made one. After these terrible three
days, the Battalion, whose luck it was on this occasion to be spared
the brunt of the action, after being relieved by the Borderers,
struggled back through a mixed barrage of shells of all calibres,
sprinkled with those of gas. There was a fog of gas and dust for miles
behind the lines.

The enemy attempt had broken down; the Battalion returned to Ghyvelde
of pleasant recollection, and on the 13th the Division was
congratulated on its successful efforts.

On July 20th Major J. Inglis joined the Battalion and took over
command at Bray Dunes Plage. On the 23rd the Brigade was inspected by
the Divisional General, Major-General Shute. After his inspection he
gave an address congratulating the Brigade on its part against the
enemy attack on the 10th inst. at Nieuport, and on the same day the
Corps Commander also inspected the Brigade, complimenting the men on
their clean and smart appearance, and paying a high tribute to their
fighting qualities.

August opened with the prospect of making an attack on the enemy and
exercises were practised accordingly. On 6th August a Battalion
reconnaissance was made which included reporting on all tracks to the
front line, arranging an assembling position in "no man's land," and
learning the condition of the existing wire in front of both our own
and the enemy's line. The weather for some little time had been very
wet, the night selected for the reconnaissance was very bright and
none too suitable, and the condition of the ground was extremely
muddy, making movement slow and difficult. After examining the whole
situation it was recognised that any possibility of successfully
attacking upon this position was out of the question. Indeed, the bad
weather throughout August delayed whatever action had been
contemplated by either side.

The 9th H.L.I. (The Glasgow Highlanders) were lying at Ghyvelde, and
on 11th August, the 17th paid them a visit, while the Battalion
football teams played a match. Another convivial day was spent on the
24th when the Battalion sports were held. The day cleared up to one of
bright sunshine, and a large number of spectators enjoyed the sport.
The events were continued on the following day when even a larger
number of guests and spectators attended, including many Colonial
soldiers, and the various events were keenly contested, both by the
men of the home Battalion and those from others in the area. A good
turn out of British and Belgian nurses from La Panne Hospital
brightened the gathering, and at the conclusion of the sports the
prizes were presented by two of the lady guests. On the Saturday
following Brigade Sports were held under ideal conditions, the
Battalion representatives winning numerous prizes.

At Church Parade on the 26th, the Presbyterian Service was conducted
in camp by the Rev. Dr. Kelman, of Free St. George's, Edinburgh, who
delivered a very impressive address which was listened to with the
closest attention by the men. Dr. Kelman then left to preach to
another Battalion and the 17th prepared to go back to the line.

The Battalion kept up its old record of keen patrolling, and during
their front line spell at the beginning of September some
reconnaissance work was well carried out under conditions unusually
difficult. On the night of 3rd September, 1917, 2nd Lieut. Forbes and
Corpl. J. Wilson of "C" Company waded across a swamped portion which
lay between the Battalion positions and a point known as Roode Poorte
Farm. Coming to a point where the water was too deep for wading,
Corpl. Wilson swam across and on reaching ground crawled in the
direction of the enemy lines. Finding this line of approach of no use
for operations, he swam back to the point where the patrol was
covering his movements, and selecting another point, swam across the
canal which lay to the east, opposite the farm buildings, and carried
out his reconnaissance.

On the 8th, while at Wulpen, a gas attack was successfully carried
through on to the enemy's lines, and on the 13th, the third
anniversary of the forming of the Battalion was spent in the trenches.
A telegram congratulating the Battalion on its anniversary was
received from the Brigadier, and a reply sent reciprocating the
General's good wishes.

The enemy perpetrated a novel surprise raid, which had some of the
elements of picture-house humour in it, on one of the Battalion
advanced Listening Posts, and by their new device gained temporary
footing in it. A strong stream of water, apparently from a hose was
directed suddenly upon the men in the Listening Post from the enemy
position. While the men were baffled and blinded by the rush of water,
the post was bombed and the two listeners retired on the main post for
support. Immediately a counter-attack was organised and led by Company
Sergeant-Major Miller of "A" Company, and the post was re-established.

Orders were received on October 5th, 1917, for the relief of the 97th
Infantry Brigade by the 125th Infantry Brigade. The Battalion
accordingly withdrew to Coxyde that night, and on the following
morning left for Adinkerke on the way to fresh fields and battles
new.




THE YPRES SALIENT.

    _Passchendaele--gallantry of attack--casualties--Hilltop
    Farm--move to Landethun and Yeuse--Serre Sector--close of 1917._


At Adinkerke, on their way to the Ypres Salient, the men were embarked
on barges on October 6th, 1917, and journeyed by canal to near
Rosendael where they billeted and where Lieut. Colonel J. Inglis
rejoined the Battalion from leave and resumed command. They then
underwent intensive training at Uxem until the 24th, when they left en
route for the Eringham area in accordance with the forward move of the
Brigade Group. The next day saw them at Rubrouck and on the next again
they arrived at Broxcele where training was again entered upon and
continued until November 9th.

About this period Lieut. Colonel Inglis and the Adjutant, Captain F.E.
Dunsmuir, were away from the Battalion making a preliminary tour of
inspection of the line on the Ypres front.

On the 10th, the Battalion was once more in column of route on their
way to Wormhoudt, and on the following day, to Watou to "Road Camp" in
the St. Jan Ter Biezen area, where training was resumed, and this time
once more within sound of the rumble of the guns. But that didn't
upset the H.L.I., whose 16th and 17th Battalions met in the final of
the Brigade Football Tournament, which was won in easy style, 5 goals
to nil, by the Chamber of Commerce boys. Four days later they defeated
the 32nd Divisional Supply Column in the semi-final of the Divisional
Tournament, and then two days after that, meeting the 2nd Royal
Inniskillen Fusiliers in the final, the 17th H.L.I. carried off the
Championship, repeating their performance of the previous year against
the same finalists.

On the following day the Divisional Commander addressed the Brigade,
which was drawn up on the football field, and reminded the men of the
sterner duties that now lay before them, and expressed the hope that
they would maintain the honourable traditions associated with the name
of the 97th Infantry Brigade--which, indeed, they more than
maintained.

The Battalion left the camp on November 22nd for Poperinghe where they
entrained to continue the journey up the line, and arriving at St.
Jean Station, detrained and marched to "Irish Camp."

On the afternoon of the 23rd a start was made for the Passchendaele
front line system, the route taken by the Battalion being for the
greater part over the duck board walks "Mouse Trap Track," which
covered ground won in the recent big push at Passchendaele. The
take-over was not completed without casualties, but these were
comparatively few considering the dangerous nature of the going, which
was in the open over shell-pitted ground. The Battalion relieved by
the 17th was the 1st Northamptonshire Battalion. During the night the
17th captured its first prisoner in this area--a corporal of the 315th
Regiment. According to his statement he had been out on patrol when he
lost one of his boots in the mud and in trying to find it he had
strayed into our lines and been taken. During their initial tour of
the Passchendaele system much heavy work was done in converting the
shell-hole defence line into trenches, and patrolling. Several
casualties were reported each day and the mud was thick and sticky. On
the 26th the Battalion was relieved and proceeded to Dambre Camp in
the Vlamertinghe area where everybody rested and completed the
preparations for the forthcoming offensive at Passchendaele.

It may be said at the outset that the element of surprise intended in
the Passchendaele attack failed entirely, as the enemy were aware of
the British intentions and fully prepared. In addition, the fact that
the artillery barrage proper did not open until zero plus eight
minutes, allowed the enemy entire freedom of action in his front posts
with rifles and machine guns.

The Battalion moved into the line on the evening of December 1st in
conjunction with the other Battalions of the Brigade--2nd K.O.Y.L.I.;
16th H.L.I.; 11th Border Regiment; and the 15th Lancashire Fusiliers
(attached). The 16th Northumberland Fusiliers of the 96th Infantry
Brigade were attached to the 97th Infantry Brigade as counter-attacking
troops to be used in the event of a strong hostile counter-attack on
the Brigade front. The frontage taken over by the Brigade was one of
1,850 yards approximately along the Passchendaele Ridge. There were
two objectives to be taken, of which sections were detailed as the job
of the 17th--a slice which included two formidable "pill-boxes" known
as the "Vat and Veal Cottages."

The Battalion assembled on a frontage of 400 yards and at Zero Hour
(1.55 a.m.) moved forward to the attack. Companies deployed from a two
platoon frontage in snake formation--this method having been adopted
owing to the shell torn nature of the ground--and advanced in four
waves. "A" and "B" Companies were to capture the first objective,
mopping up all occupied points in the way, including the two pill
boxes, while "C" and "D" were to "leap-frog" through them, carry the
next objective and consolidate.

The initial stages of the attack were successfully carried through,
but the enemy--as was afterwards learned--knowing of what was on foot,
waited in readiness. Suddenly he opened heavy machine gun fire upon
the advancing Companies, inflicting heavy casualties which, in the
dark and over the difficult ground, had the effect of splitting up the
sections and creating some confusion. The officers and men of the
Battalion gallantly pressed on against these odds, however, and
succeeded in reaching their objective; but the enemy machine gun and
rifle fire became so intense that their advanced positions were
rendered humanly untenable. Our men, though forced to retire in
places, established themselves in shell-hole posts, where an attempt
was made to consolidate.

The artillery and machine gun barrage, though intense, had failed,
owing to the enemy's fore-knowledge of the attack, to effect its
purpose. His strong points were heavily garrisoned and wired and he
was also found to be established in strong lines of trenches also
effectively wired. The Battalion hung on all through that awful night
in its isolated positions, for orders were received that the attack
would be renewed in the morning, but these orders were afterwards
cancelled.

From dawn onwards artillery fire slackened somewhat, but the enemy
machine gunners and snipers kept up harassing fire from their well
established posts against the men in their exposed and isolated posts.

It was obvious that a hostile counter-attack might be expected, and
this took place about 4 p.m. on the afternoon of the 2nd, preceded
by an intense artillery barrage. Owing to the terrible difficulties of
their position, and the sweeping casualties inflicted, the line was
forced back, but the actual enemy attack which followed his barrage
was met by the rifle fire of the shattered 17th, and after the Bosches
had approached within a certain distance of the posts, they broke and
turned back in retreat.

   [Illustration: TYPES OF SUPPORT LINE DUG-OUTS AND FIRST AID POST.
   _To face page 68._]

Though the withdrawal of the Divisional line had been almost general,
some of the Battalion posts were still hanging on to the advanced
positions on the 3rd. Many wounded were lying out, suffering the most
appalling rigours of war and the Battalion stretcher-bearers displayed
great devotion to duty in ignoring the heavy fire while bringing them
in to comparative shelter. The work at first was extremely dangerous,
but later on in the day a lull occurred when it was possible to carry
on this labour of mercy under less trying conditions. And it must be
recorded, as far as this battle is concerned, that from this point
onward the German reversed his frequent policy and shewed respect for
the Red Cross Flag, only one instance of sniping taking place when one
of the Battalion stretcher-bearers was shot dead while bending over a
wounded comrade. Enemy stretcher-bearers were also at work and in some
instances they reciprocated attentions given to their wounded, by
dressing and carrying our casualties. In this way all the wounded were
got in before the Brigade was relieved that night. The Battalion
frontage was taken over by the 5/6th Royal Scots. The relief was
successfully completed and the remnants of the Battalion reached
"Hilltop Farm" in the early morning, entraining later for Hospital
Camp in the Vlamertinghe area. The casualties were particularly heavy
among Officers and N.C.O.s, and gives trenchant evidence of their
self-sacrificing gallantry in seeking by utter disregard for danger to
turn a forlorn hope into victory, and by personal example and
incentive to make still richer the honourable traditions of the 17th
in the face of such overwhelming odds, and amidst such overaweing
devastation. In this action seven officers were killed and five
wounded. Of other ranks 41 were killed, 130 wounded and 13 missing.

The Battalion was organised as far as possible in its depleted
condition and work and training carried on until December 10th, when
once more the unit moved up the line to Hilltop Farm, N.E. of Ypres.
During their stay here, Mr. Fred A. Farrell, the well-known Scottish
artist, visited the 17th on a commission from the Corporation of
Glasgow to execute drawings of the Glasgow Battalions and the places
in which they were operating.

On December 13th they were back in the trenches. Hard winter weather
had now set in, with fog, frost and water sogged ground. On the 20th
the Battalion was relieved and, as far as weather is concerned, spent
a typical Christmas Day when it came round, in Dambre Camp. Being in
Corps Reserve, nothing in the nature of Christmas festivities could be
permitted, but the gifts supplied by the Chamber of Commerce provided
seasonable fare and brought a measure of good cheer.

After a series of alarms and stand-to's, a Divisional Relief was
carried through, and on December 30th the Battalion trained to
Audruicq and set out on an arduous route march for the villages of
Landrethun and Yeuse, where the men were happily enabled to spend a
night's rest in comfortable billets, "A," "B," "C," and Headquarters
in the former village, and "D" in the latter.

The last day of the year which had probably been the hardest and, as
far as campaigning is concerned, the most eventful in the history of
the Battalion, was passed amidst the peaceful surroundings of these
villages untouched by war. The beginning of the year had seen the
Battalion in the line in the Serre Sector, then had followed the
memorable days of Beaumont Hamel, Honoroye, the battle of Savy and the
taking of Fayet in the St. Quentin area, a well deserved period of
rest at Canizy and thence by train and road into Belgium, being held
in reserve for the Battle of Messines, three hard months spent in the
line in the Nieuport Sector and the St. George's Sector, and then
after a spell of rest--forward into Passchendaele.




THE DISBANDMENT.

    _Hogmanay--with the II. Corps--the blow--new army
    establishment--Hospital Camp--disbandment--the passing of the
    "17th."_


For some time rumours had been flitting about that certain Battalions
were going to be disbanded in accordance with a programme of
reorganised military establishments. Every New Army unit in the B.E.F.
had about this time qualms of fear that if rumours proved true the
selection might fall on them. Esprit de corps was never stronger and
the very thought of possible separations from brothers-in-arms, fell
as a vague shadowy fear over the 17th because it looked very likely
that the 17th, being the junior H.L.I. Battalion of the Division,
would be the Divisional victim in any re-arrangement that might be
carried out. But nothing definite was known, and the advent of New
Year, 1918, brought with it a feeling of hope for the future.

The Battalion was still billeted in the peaceful villages of
Landrethun and Yeuse. On the opening day of the year the ground was
snow covered, rendering parades well nigh impossible, and so the men
were at liberty. Preparations were eagerly pushed forward for a New
Year Feast, and on the 3rd, in spite of provisioning difficulties,
very complete arrangements had been successfully made considering the
length of time available for providing the men with a seasonable
repast on that evening. The Companies sat down to a feast of roast
pork--which only a few hours before had been a live pig. There was
soup, haggis, plum pudding, apple dumpling, cake, cigarettes, and
copious supplies of beer. The Commanding Officer, accompanied by Major
G.R.S. Paterson, and the Adjutant, visited each Company in turn to
wish them the Compliments of the Season, and the night finished with
song and story.

Work and training was resumed again in earnest the next day as far as
the weather conditions would permit. On the 9th of January the
Battalion moved off, embussing for the forward area to operate on the
II. Corps Line. After a cold journey in a heavy snowstorm, they
arrived at Murat Camp late at night and came under the command of the
35th Division. They found the camp in very bad order and set about
putting it right, meanwhile working parties were carrying on under the
C.R.E. of the Division. Splendid work was carried out by the Battalion
during this period, despite snowstorms and blizzards, and high praise
was given to the unit by the Corps Commander. All the Royal Engineer
Officers connected with the work declared they had never had better
nor keener infantry parties.

On the 16th Major Morton assumed command of the Battalion during the
absence of Lieut.-Colonel Inglis on leave; and on the 18th Major
Morton was ordered to hospital and Major Paterson took over.

_The Battalion Intelligence News Sheet_, inaugurated to keep all ranks
fully informed of the principal events of the day as regards the war,
was circulated, but it could not hope to oust _The Outpost_ as the
real news vehicle of the 17th.

On the 25th of January the Battalion left Murat Camp for a camp near
Woeston and came under the command of the 1st Division, and on the
27th the Battalion relieved the 10th Gloucesters in reserve in the Het
Sas Sector, and carried on improving the line until the 31st of
January--when the blow fell and hopes were dashed to the ground. While
in Brigade Support at Houthust Forest Sector, Major Paterson was sent
for by Brigadier-General C.A. Blacklock, who informed him that the
re-organisation of the Army necessitated the disbanding of an H.L.I.
Battalion in the 32nd Division. The Battalion selected was the junior
one, the 17th. General Blacklock expressed in very generous terms his
admiration for the Battalion, and for all that it had done, and
expressed his sorrow and regret that so fine a unit had to be broken
up, and the officers, non-com. officers and men serving in it would be
drafted to other H.L.I. Battalions, which would necessitate, in many
cases, the breaking up of what had been very long friendships.

Early in January, 1918, it had been decided by the War Office to adopt
the three Battalion per Brigade system throughout the British Army,
and this resulted in the disbandment of many Battalions which had seen
much service abroad, and had won a name for themselves in France.
Perhaps the chief Battalion in the whole army to be disbanded was the
17th Service Battalion of the Highland Light Infantry, and the
disbandment of this Battalion came as a bitter blow, not only to those
who were serving in the Battalion at that time, but also to those who
had served in it at some time or other in the past and possibly to
those who were looking forward to serving with it in the future.

Needless to say all ranks of the Battalion were deeply disappointed at
the Commander-in-Chief's decision, which was received as a calamity.
The highest traditions of the Battalion had been maintained
throughout, and the esprit de corps and good comradeship of all ranks
made the news almost unbearable.

As soon as the official notification arrived the Battalion was
relieved by the First Battalion, the Dorset Regiment, and was
withdrawn to Hospital Camp near Woesten where the disbanding was to be
carried out. From then onwards an enormous amount of work fell on
everybody, especially on the Adjutant, Captain Dunsmuir, M.C., who was
responsible for compiling the rolls of the different drafts, which
were to proceed to the various H.L.I. Battalions in France, comprising
the 10/11th, 12th, 14th, 15th, 16th, and 18th Battalions.

On the 11th of February the first draft, consisting of about seven
officers and 200 other ranks marched out of camp to the tune of the
pipes en route for the railway station at Boesinghe, where it
entrained and proceeded to join the 10/11th Battalion H.L.I. Although
there was much cheering as the train steamed away, yet there were many
men with sad hearts at leaving the Battalion they had served in from
the beginning, which had become their home in the Army.

For the next few days that followed, similar drafts were sent off
until the strength of the Battalion was reduced to the establishment
for Headquarters with Transport. For about a week this small unit
carried on, until the Transport section, under the Transport Officer,
Lieut. Smith, was detached, and was attached to the Division where it
remained for some time until it was sent to the base for drafting. All
that remained now was the Headquarters establishment, commanded by
Lieut.-Colonel Inglis, D.S.O., who had returned from leave, and this
establishment was sent to take over another camp which was to be run
as a Divisional Reception Camp for men returning to their units from
leave. About a week later orders were received that some of the H.Q.
personnel were to be drafted away, and on the next day a draft of
about thirty men under R.S.M. Burns proceeded to join the 13th
Entrenching Battalion. A few days later all that was left of the
Battalion under Captain Dunsmuir, M.C., was drafted to the same
Battalion, and Lieut.-Colonel Inglis, D.S.O., and Major Morton, who
was again with the Battalion, were ordered to report to Divisional
Headquarters.

All that remained now of the 17th Battalion Highland Light Infantry
was the name, but that name will always remain in the minds of those
who served in the Battalion, and the mere mention of it brings back
happy memories of days spent both at home and abroad to those who knew
it.

As William Glennie of "A" Company, writes:--"That the good old
Battalion would end, we all expected, as the happy sequence of
completed duty, and somehow we all imagined we would be there. In our
ideal picture of the scene, George Square was clearly outlined;
somehow we fancied old Hughie would order 'Officers, fall out please,'
and while the ranks took the rhythmical right turn, the 'Faither'
would step forward from the right of 'C' Company, give his
characteristic red army salute, shake his cane and rap out 'Quick time
off the parade ground' in his best Troon parade style. But we forgot
the war, as too often in our ideal outlook we did.

       *       *       *       *       *

"'Fall out ... the 17th Highland Light Infantry....' That was at No. 6
Camp, Calais, in the chill dusk of 6th February, 1918. Back from
Blighty leave, as the news spread, we took it philosophically--the old
Battalion had been disbanded, and scattered to various sister
battalions. Here we were, practically all the originals to the number
of about 50, the sole remnants of 26 months of war, welcomed back to
France for the second time, but not to the Seventeenth; orphans to be
adopted by strange parents.

       *       *       *       *       *

"'Quick march.' The party swung slowly down the rough track between
the huts. It was one of those innumerable hutted campments behind
Poperinghe. At the junction of the road stood Colonel Inglis, Majors
Morton and Paterson, Captain Dunsmuir and R.S.M. Kelly. It all seemed
so usual, save that there was more handshaking and waving of bonnets.
'Cheerio, old chap--best of luck.' Gone, those pals of three years in
camp, trench, billet and shell hole; but we never knew how great a
part of our life they had become. Then in the look in each other's
eyes, in the huskiness of the voice, rather than in the ill-concealed
tear, came the full realisation of the undying spirit of our old
Chamber of Commerce Battalion, and the certainty that the death of the
Battalion had bequeathed to us the LIVING SOUL OF THE SEVENTEENTH."




III.--AN ODD MUSTER.


THE SPIRIT OF THE BATTALION.


A corporate body is always a great mystery. Before very long it always
develops a spirit which is something more than the sum of the
individual spirits which compose it. And no man can quite say how it
comes into existence. It may be a greater spirit than that of any
individual. Sometimes it is not so great as that of its members.

And Battalions are no exception to this rule. Each brings forth a
spirit, and by that spirit the members are henceforth profoundly
influenced. It is not the spirit of the Colonel, or of any particular
member. It is the spirit of the Battalion, something compounded by the
subtle alchemies of the spiritual world out of the individual souls of
officers and privates alike.

Of the spirit of the 17th H.L.I. it may at once be said that the
outstanding characteristic was high-hearted youth. Most of the members
of the Battalion were young, but the Battalion itself had the
qualities of youth more truly than any of them. It was essentially
gay. It did its work to the accompaniment of a fine hilarity. It could
laugh even on the eve of battle. It could even be uproarious and
exuberant as only the really young can.

And yet it was very efficient youth. To a man these soldiers took
their work seriously, and because they brought to it a fine quality of
intelligence, the Battalion rose to efficiency with astonishing
rapidity. Many men read eagerly in text books about training and
tactics and so forth, and the Battalion from end to end was intolerant
of slovenliness. If it resembled a young man, it was a young man who
meant business.

   [Illustration: Major The Rev. A. HERBERT GRAY.]

   [Illustration: CHURCH PARADE--PREES HEATH CAMP.
   _To face page 76._]

   [Illustration: VARIOUS PHASES OF BATTALION TRAINING
   _To face page 77._]

It was also very gifted youth. Its athletic record speaks for itself,
as does also its military record. But other gifts were lavished upon
it. It knew and loved good literature. It had numbers of trained
singers and musicians. It had dramatic possibilities in it. It knew
much of science and mechanics. That young thing which we call the 17th
H.L.I. in fact loved life, and every side of life. It throbbed with
energy of body, mind, and spirit. It tingled with many sided vitality.

But above all, it was loveable youth. Few bodies of soldiers have ever
so fully won the affections of towns and country districts. It has
left a mark of its own on Troon, Prees Heath, Wensley, Sheffield, and
Codford. People hurried out to see the column go by, and after it was
gone the hearts of men and women were happier because of it. It came
to have a place in the lives of thousands, and they all thought of it
with affection. As we look back on it now it lives with us as a silver
memory,--something belonging to the world of sunshine and laughter, of
beauty and of courage. The West of Scotland gave of its best to make
up that whole, and while it lived it made a place for itself in the
hearts of the West, which is secure for all time.

Its career was short, but its immortality is safe.

It is good to have known it. And though tragedy unspeakable dogged its
footsteps, and broke its life in this world, it lives and will always
live gloriously in the hearts and memories of uncounted men and women
who believe more in humanity, and perhaps even believe more in God
because of the "Seventeenth."




"CO-OPERATION."


One of the most outstanding and important things taught in military
text books is the value of striving to obtain "co-operation of all
arms." That is to say, the more sympathy, good comradeship and
understanding that exists between Infantry and Artillery and Cavalry
and Tanks and Air Force people and so on, the more efficient each of
these various arms becomes to carry out its respective duties.
Knowledge of the general tactical principles under which each arm
operates, and personal acquaintanceship with the various officers and
men of such other units, all tend to cement combined operations into
one smooth working whole for the pleasant efficiency of the
combinations concerned and for the better (or worse!) confusion of the
enemy.

Such co-operation was an ideal often aimed at, but only too seldom
actually accomplished. It required the best of officers and men to
attain that perfect co-operation through understanding, which does not
either fall short of or over reach the mark.

The following notes written by Major C.E. Lawder, late commanding "A"
Battery of the 168th Brigade, 32nd Division, Royal Field Artillery,
reveals how smoothly things ran in that all important section of
co-operation--that between Infantry and Artillery. In the eyes of
those accustomed to military affairs the following statements will
likely be recognised as perhaps the finest tribute that could be paid
to the 17th H.L.I., for it is not so much an item of direct praise, as
a sure indication of the high quality of efficiency attained by all
ranks of the Battalion, not to mention the pleasant reflection given
of "good humoured gentlemen." The 17th was ever proud to serve with
the gunners of the 168th Brigade, whose fine shooting inspired
confidence and courage:--

"We first met the famous 17th H.L.I. about New Year, 1916, in the La
Boiselle Sector and much concern as to the pronunciation of the
Scottish names given to the trenches was felt by my Yorkshire
gunners--Sauchiehall Street in particular defeated them. They wished
the Jocks would use Christian Huddersfield names! All my officers were
much impressed by the great kindness and hospitality shown them by the
17th H.L.I. Messes when liaison Officer with the Infantry or when
going round the front line, which we did constantly, myself as Battery
Commander every third day, and the subalterns daily--all to try and
get suggestions to better strafe the Boche and to show the Jocks that
the gunners wanted to share the pleasures of the front line with our
splendid Infantry.

"The 17th were commonly known as the Raiders, and most excellent they
were at the job--the Hun had a holy horror of the men from Glasgow. I
well remember a chat after a good raid with the big drummer and a
little corporal of the H.L.I. Both had greatly distinguished
themselves and they asked me not to question them as to details of the
raid, as some very dirty work took place across the way! I expect it
did from the look in their eye and the happy way they handled their
clubs.

"A great entente cordiale existed between my Battery and the Regiment
and this was referred to by Major-General Budworth, C.R.A., 4th Army,
at the Conference at Flixecourt before July 1st, 1916. All the gunners
at the gun position, then in the Orchard of Martinsart, sent in a
signed petition to be allowed to have the honour of going over the top
with the 17th in their next raid. The 17th returned the compliment by
Major W. Paul and about 20 raiders coming up to the guns from Rest
billets and carrying ammunition for us all night while we were
covering another regiment's raid. I got Major Paul on the firing seat
of one of the guns and some of the men at other guns. They did a lot
of firing but did not enjoy it. They all preferred the Infantry!

"The 17th were badly cut up on 1st July, 1916, and my men were much
concerned about them. We were all greatly relieved to hear that both
Col. Morton and Major Paul were not among the casualties. Some of the
Officers will doubtless remember a cheery Entente Dinner at
Bouzincourt--Cocktails by our Adjutant, Lobsters and Rouen Ducks are
still fresh in my memory. The Division moved up north to the Hulluch
Sector after the Somme July Battle. We were put to another Division
for a short time, and then our own Infantry turned up. It was cheery
meeting our old friends again, but many familiar names and faces were,
sad to say, missing.

"We had a very safe and nice gun position on a peninsula in a marsh at
Annieguin. This we made into a very smart and show position--lots of
"spit and polish." We had many visitors from the 17th and a lot of
their men used to come and bathe with ours. We fixed up a regular
bathing pool with springboard complete. All this was under cover of
trees and shrubs and quite out of sight of the Hun. I remember two of
the H.L.I. being pulled from or being stabbed in, a sap in No Man's
Land near the famous Brickstacks. We all wanted to have a Raid at once
in revenge. I forget whether it came off. Shooting here was difficult,
as the trenches were so close together, and very difficult to observe
fire. Very different was the supply of ammunition in mid and late 1916
to early in the year. It was a horrible feeling for a Battery when
asked to shoot and help the poor old Infantry, to have to refuse for
lack of shells. At the Brickstacks we used to often fire--almost
daily--from 150 to 350 rounds Agressive Action on Hun Tender Spots. It
was then that we could retaliate about 50 to 1 if they were
sufficiently "agressed" to fire back. That kept the line--our side
(!)--quiet.

"We all moved down in October, 1916, to the Ancre show, and a horrible
wet march it was. We separated for a bit, the Battery going to the
Scottish 51st Division. We were then rejoined by our own Infantry at
Beaumont Hamel. I got smashed up and was evacuated home, and just
after, my best Officer, Lieut. H.W. Ainley was burned to death at the
Wagon Line. He was a splendid fellow and very well known to the 17th.

"Officers and men of both Units were always together and better
feeling between them could not exist. It was a great honour to know
the 17th and we gloried in being the Battery to cover them at the P.
of E. in a raid." [The P. of E. is the Point of Entry, necessitating
very accurate gunlaying, timing, and strict adherence to the barrage
programme.]

   [Illustration: "THE OUTPOST" STAFF ON ACTIVE SERVICE.]

   [Illustration: THE ORIGINAL EDITORIAL STAFF.
   Sgt. FERGUSON, the late Sgt. REITH and Pte. HUTCHESON.
   _To face page 81._]




"THE OUTPOST."


One of the most outstanding activities of the Battalion was the
production of a periodical which combined a considerable high level of
artistic and literary excellence with a racy narrative of Battalion
news and _personalia_. This regimental magazine of the 17th H.L.I. was
conceived in 1914, though actually founded early in 1915, and from
that time, throughout all the rigours of work at home--and the
extraordinary difficulties of operations in the Field, _The Outpost_
was produced, and well produced. Perhaps more than anything, the
standard and record of this production, and its acceptance and
success, both within the unit and with an ever growing general public,
reflects the intellectual level of those who composed the Battalion.
In an appreciation which appeared in _The Glasgow News_ in June, 1919,
on the occasion of the completion of the seventh volume, it is
remarked--"Nursed in its early youth by an editorial staff that was
not without experience, it proved a lusty infant, and as the years
went on it gained in strength.

"In a sort of valedictory--for the magazine will still be published
annually by the Seventeen Club--the editor sings its praises. He has
every right to pitch them on a high key. He points out that the paper
has always been welcomed and appreciated in many homes (yes, even in
Buckingham Palace), and in training camps, hospitals, rest camps,
lonely dug-outs, and soaking trenches, as well as in the scorching
East and amid Arctic snows. Wherever old members have gone at duty's
call, their magazine has followed, and has interested and cheered with
its articles and illustrations of the lighter side of Army life.

"Lately a noted writer on military topics, an English officer of high
rank, in giving a most appreciative criticism of _The Outpost_,
said--'It is only your dour, determined Scotsmen who could manage to
'carry-on' such a paper under the tremendous handicaps of active
service, and the result has been unquestionably the finest literary
and artistic venture in battalion magazines that the war has
produced.'"

In a note concerning those who originated and inspired this war
publication--unique in its continued success--Mr. J. M'Kechnie, whose
name is intimately associated with its success, says--"The credit of
the original idea of publishing a Battalion Magazine belongs to Lieut.
J. Kelly--our first R.S.M. Early in January, 1915, he called a meeting
at which the journalistic machinery was set in motion. The appointment
of the late Mr. Steven D. Reith as Editor assured the success of the
venture, for under his able and enthusiastic direction, _The Outpost_
from the first number reached a standard hitherto unapproached in
British military publications. From month to month it supplied a
bright literary and artistic reflection of the chief events in the
life of the Battalion, and the editorial aimed at giving a lead to the
more serious thought of its readers.

"Throughout its active service career _The Outpost_ was edited by the
following:--The late Mr. Steven D. Reith, Mr. J.L. Hardie, Mr. J.
M'Kechnie, and Mr. W. Glennie. Mr. W. J.F. Hutcheson performed the
duties of Home Editor until November, 1917, when he handed on the
torch to Mr. Frank K. Pickles, who acted as Editor during the last
year."

Copies and Volumes of _The Outpost_ will remain among the most
cherished keepsakes of all members of the Battalion, and a complete
set of all numbers of the production is being carefully and jealously
preserved in the archives of the Glasgow Chamber of Commerce. There
its pages will rank with the greatest achievements of industrial and
commercial affairs as evidence of the judgment, humour, poetry, and
doggedness of a Battalion so intimately bound up in the traditions of
a great house, and indeed, also reflective of the traditions of
Scottish industrialism, whose eminence is the manifestation of those
very elements of balanced judgment and perseverance, coupled with that
saving humour and imagination which has marked alike its progress in
the markets of the world no less than in the fields of war.

   [Illustration: The Late STEVEN D. REITH, D.C.M.]

   [Illustration: Lce.-Corpl. F.K. PICKLES.
   _To face page 82._]

   [Illustration: MARGUS--THE MASCOT.]

   [Illustration: ONE OF THE BATTALION RUGBY FOOTBALL TEAMS.
   _To face page 83._]




SPORT OF THE BATTALION.


The achievements of the Seventeenth in the field of fire cannot be
dissociated from their experiences in the field of sport. The exploits
of the Battalion in Football, Cross-country Running, and
Boxing--revealing as they did the elements of challenge, perseverance,
cheerfulness in defeat, and also the power to win honours to their
name--have their grand reflex in the more grim and arduous experiences
through which the Battalion was called to pass.

In October, 1915, the Battalion won Divisional honours in
Cross-country Running. The winning of the Cup and medals in an event
in which a thousand runners took part was no small feat.

In the world of "Rugger" the Battalion's career was one triumphal
march, but the end accomplished cannot be summed up in figures,
adverse or the reverse. As for "Soccer" the successive achievements of
the Battalion are recorded in every number of _The Outpost_. Minor
struggles and conquests are recalled and rejoiced in, but the glory of
carrying off another Divisional Cup will never be forgotten by those
who witnessed the fray. Progress to the final of the event was not
easy, and the final was a particularly hard fought game, and though
the Battalion won, it was felt that equal honours were due to the
vanquished for their good play and sportsmanship.

In the Boxing World, the name of Corporal George Barrie, will be ever
green in the memory of all Seventeenth men; and the honour brought to
the Battalion by his pupil, Pte. Cushley, in winning two Divisional
Cups for Boxing, can be looked upon as a fitting tribute to Barrie,
the man who played the game even unto death.

Altogether the Seventeenth has much to be proud of in its athletic
record, and in future days when those of the Battalion sit round and
tell of the things which are theirs, which they won also at great
cost, their prowess in the field will not be among the least; for it
played no insignificant part in the making of the Battalion which,
although disbanded, has remained, both in name and in comradeship,
still the Seventeenth.




THE R.S.M.


Any history of the "Seventeenth" would be incomplete without a passing
reference to James Kelly.

Chosen at the inception of the Battalion out of a large number of
applicants, and appointed Regimental Sergeant Major, his selection was
amply justified by results. He had seen much service in The Royal
Scots, and active service in South Africa, where he was
Colour-Sergeant of his Company and where he gained the D.C.M.

A man of commanding appearance, always very smartly turned out, he set
a fine example to all ranks and speedily infused the real military
spirit into the rank and file. During training at home and on service
in France he did splendid work, and to him is due in no small measure
the high standard of efficiency and discipline maintained in the
Battalion. In manner somewhat brusque, but of a tender heart withal,
he was the friend and confidant of nearly all the Officers, N.C.O.s
and men, and when off parade the best of good fellows.

                                        DAVID S. MORTON,
                                             _Lieut.-Colonel._




A REMEMBRANCE.

Do you hear it, all of you, and remember. Listen!

"Markers outwards turn. Quick march."

"Up, number four. Look sharp. That'll do."

"Markers, steadi-i-i-i-i----."

"Right turn."

"Fall in." And then the final great roar of--

"Stop all that yammering." And how quickly it stopped, too.

Do you remember it, and who said it? Of course you do, just as clearly
as I myself do. You remember those early mornings, too. The sleepy
chatter stilled in an instant to silence. And all those other days,
too, when custom had made it imperative on all parades, it was part of
us and our ceremonial.

   [Illustration: Lieut. and Q.-M. (formerly Regimental Sergeant
   Major) JAMES KELLY.
   _To face page 84._]

   [Illustration: Mrs. DAVID S. MORTON,
   Convener of the Comforts Committee.
   _To face page 85._]

The repeating of it to ourselves conjures up the history of those
never-to-be-forgotten days and carries back our spirits to commune
with all those gone before us.

I say it to myself often now just to bring before me those wonderful
memories. I have heard it on the sea front at Troon; on the Hills of
Dundonald; at Prees Heath, in the lovely woodlands and parks of
England; on the moors of Yorkshire; at Sheffield. It has sounded over
the vast spaces of Salisbury Plain, and in France and Flanders, where
all it stands for was so wonderfully justified and upheld, calling up
that wonderful spirit and special discipline. That was the dear old
Seventeenth.




THE COMFORTS COMMITTEE.


On the Battalion embarking for active service, the Battalion Committee
suggested that a Ladies' Committee be formed to carry out the supply
of Comforts which would tend to alleviate the hardships of the battle
line. The members of the Chamber provided funds in a most generous
manner, and the following ladies consented to form a Ladies'
Committee:--Mrs. D.S. Morton (Convener), Lady M'Innes Shaw, Mrs. J.M.
Mitchell, Mrs. R.A. Murray, Mrs. W.J. Paul, Mrs. W.F. Russell, Mrs.
John Reid, Mrs. Albert A. Smith, and Miss G.D. Young.

Miss G.D. Young acted as Secretary and at a later stage she was
succeeded by Miss M.E. M'Clymont of the staff of the Chamber. The
relatives of the men of the Battalion were notified of the formation
of the Comforts Committee, and were invited to assist in knitting
articles, the wool for which in most cases, was supplied by the
Committee. With this help, and by the industry of the Ladies'
Committee, a very large quantity of shirts, socks, helmets, scarfs,
gloves, etc., was sent abroad.

The conditions under which the men were fighting was always wisely
considered, and for trench dug-outs and cellar billets, a regular
supply of candles was forwarded by the Committee. Christmas presents
were also sent overseas for each man. Provision was made for the time
when the Battalion was out of line for rest, and a supply of weekly
and monthly periodicals was regularly despatched. Needless to say, all
these were very acceptable.

While thanks are due to all the members of the Ladies' Committee, it
must be placed on record that Mrs. Morton, as Convener, rendered
invaluable services and it is universally recognised that to her
indefatigable labours the men in France owed much.




MEMORIAL SERVICE IN GLASGOW.


A Memorial Service in honour of the officers, non-commissioned
officers and men of the 17th Highland Light Infantry, who fell in the
battle of the Somme and elsewhere was held at Glasgow Cathedral, on
July 8th, 1917. Fully 1,200 people were present, and many soldiers of
all ranks were among the congregation, including a number of wounded
men belonging to the Battalion. The "Dead March in Saul" was played at
the commencement, and the service was most impressive throughout. The
preacher was the Rev. A. Herbert Gray, one time Chaplain of the
Battalion, and the service included the anthem, "What are these?" sung
by the choir.

Preaching from the text--"We also are compassed about with so great a
cloud of witnesses," Mr. Gray said: "It must not be to mere mourning
that we give ourselves this afternoon. We are met to recall a very
great page in the history of our city and district. In the year 1916,
the hundreds of young men of whom we are thinking dared to die in a
great cause. Young, strong, and free, full of high hopes and great
purpose, in love with life, and in a hundred ways fitted for mastery
in it, they yet consented to deal with death. A hundred other
ambitions had flushed their hearts, but because humanity called they
laid them all aside and went to the great war. No such life was their
choice, but because it was their destiny they accepted it with a
smile. No compulsion save that of honour constrained them. They were
recruited simply by conscience and the claims of humanity. They made
one of the finest Battalions that ever left these shores, for some of
the very best of the rising generation were in their ranks. And though
they were not soldiers by profession they proved themselves worthy of
a regiment that has traditions of honour as old as the British Army.

"Wherefore, here in God's House, we may well first of all rejoice
concerning them, and give thanks to God who has put so great a spirit
into man. Though tears be in our hearts we must not fail to be proud
and thankful--proud because they were our brothers, and thankful
because they finished their course in faith."

After mentioning the subject of a suitable memorial, and suggesting
that there could be nothing more worthy than the monument of a Britain
turned to God, the preacher concluded with the following impressive
words:--

"From a hundred lonely graves in that foreign land--from the spots
where they fell, and which now are sacred spots for us--our dead are
asking us when we mean to erect that monument. From trench and shell
hole where death found them, their voices call--young, musical voices,
the voices of boys still in their teens, the voices of martyrs on
life's threshold. Scarce a wind can blow that will not waft to you
these voices. And they ask a better Britain as their monument. They
ask it of you and me. Shall we not go from this place resolved to
build it?"




THE CLUB.


Much has been written, and many discussions have arisen concerning the
good-fellowship and camaraderie which exists among the survivors of
the 17th H.L.I., and able pens will express the high ideals aimed at,
and the strong determination in the minds of those remnants to
establish "The Club" on a basis good and sound. Since the inauguration
of the Battalion in September, 1914, there has been a predominating
feeling that such an institution should be made.

Since the first batch of men arrived in Glasgow from France
arrangements were made which facilitated meeting daily in Craig's
Smoke Room in Gordon Street--the arrangement still holds good. Any
forenoon the boys may be found over their coffee and incidentally
discussing the chance of one day, in the near future, having a "nook"
of their own. The object of having such a place is to afford such
privacy as premises of their own would give, in order to have
uninterrupted meetings, business or pleasure, as the occasion
demanded.

One great object of the Club is to establish the Benevolent Fund of
the Battalion on a sound financial basis, so as to be in a position to
deal with necessitous cases connected with the 17th Battalion, and it
is thought that this is the only way. It is intended that the Club
should be self-supporting, and assistance is hoped for, morally and
financially, of all those who are interested in the affairs
appertaining to the old Battalion.

A Committee to carry on the good work has been formed, and includes
Colonel Morton, Major Young, with Messrs. Ritchie, Tilley, Corbett and
M'Andrew from the various Companies, along with Mr. J.W. Arthur on the
Benevolent Fund Committee, as representing the Chamber of Commerce.
This Committee will report progress to a General Meeting, at which it
is hoped to decide what steps may be taken to acquire a Working
Capital. It is possible that a Voluntary Subscription List may be
opened, and it is hoped that the opportunity may be given to help the
worthy project of thus forming a Memorial to those who have fallen in
the great cause.

No better monument of love and good-fellowship could be thought of
than to give a helping hand in the hour of need, and, to provide
towards a comfortable home for those who are left to enjoy it.




"E" COMPANY.


At the beginning of January, 1915, the 17th H.L.I. had recruited its
full war strength, and the authorities decreed that a Reserve Company
should be formed. This became "E" Company, and was trained as a unit
of the Battalion at Troon, until the 17th left for England. On May
13th, 1915, it was transferred to Gailes, and became a unit of the
19th Reserve Battalion, Lieut.-Colonel Auld being in command. Under
his training, the Company, as well as the Battalion, reached a high
standard of efficiency. After being inspected by Brigadier-General
Cockburn on the 28th September, 1916, a draft of 101 N.C.O.s and men
was sent to join the 17th H.L.I. at Codford. What was left of "E" Coy.
entrained on 26th October, 1915, at Gailes for Ripon. The men were
billeted in excellent huts in the South Camp of that quaint old
cathedral town, where route marches took place and many excursions
were made to many of the interesting towns and places of interest.

When the 17th embarked for France, some details left behind arrived
from Codford on 15th December, 1915, and brought back many old friends
and highly efficient instructors. Later on Viscount French paid a
visit of inspection to the Ripon area, and the 19th H.L.I. formed part
of the Guard of Honour on that occasion.

After Ripon came Montrose, and although connected with the Battalion's
history only in a small way, the period from 25th April, 1916, to 12th
June, 1917, is nevertheless well worthy of mention. Montrose with its
lovely beaches and pleasant surroundings, forms one of the happiest
memories of those who found themselves part of the 19th H.L.I. during
its sojourn there.

1916-17 was a trying time in the life of the Reserve Battalion.
Training was concentrated to an unheard-of degree--a recruit being
allowed nine short weeks before he found himself on Embarkation Leave.
Drafts were required by the dozen, both for the Western Front (for
which the Somme and Beaumont Hamel Offensives were chiefly
responsible) and for the Eastern Front. Then there was the trying
coastguard work with its trench-digging excursions to Lunan Bay--work
which probably helped to avert a danger not so remote as we then
imagined.

"E" Company had a fair share of all these worries, and its able
Commander, Captain F.D. Morton, was kept busy choosing drafts,
arranging programmes, and working out tactical schemes.

Major W.H. Anderson, who afterwards became Lieut.-Colonel, and was
awarded the V.C. after his lamented death, did much for the good of
the Battalion; and the Soldiers' Home, run by Mrs. Anderson, and Mrs.
Auld, proved of great advantage to the men. This period marked the
extinction of "E" Company, as representing the 17th. Draft after draft
had robbed it of its original appearance, and when on 1st September,
1916, the 19th became the 78th Training Reserve Battalion, it lost all
semblance of its former self, and may be said to have had an
inglorious end to a short but useful life.

   [Illustration: LIEUT.-COLONEL W. AULD, V.D.
   _To face page 90._]

   [Illustration: The late Lt.-Col. WILLIAM HERBERT ANDERSON, V.C.]

   [Illustration: The late Sergt. J.Y. TURNBULL, V.C.
   _To face page 91._]




IV.--HONOURS AND AWARDS.


Battalion Honour.


Extract from _The London Gazette_, dated 26/5/16.

The following is extracted from Sir Douglas Haig's Despatch, dated
19/5/16:--

    "8.--While many other units have done excellent work during the
    period under review, the following have been brought to my
    notice for good work in carrying out or repelling local attacks
    and raids--

    "17th (Service) Battalion Highland Light Infantry."



Victoria Cross.

+Lieut.-Colonel W.H. Anderson, formerly Captain "C" Company. Gained
    while serving with 12th Battalion H.L.I.

+15888 Sergeant J.Y. TURNBULL. _Gazette_ dated 25/12/16.

+ Since deceased.

The following is the extract from _The London Gazette_ of 3rd May,
1918, intimating the award of the Victoria Cross:--

    "T. Maj. (A. Lt.-Col.) WILLIAM HERBERT ANDERSON,
         late H.L.I.

    "For most conspicuous bravery, determination, and gallant
    leading of his command. The enemy attacked on the right of the
    Battalion frontage, and succeeded in penetrating the wood held
    by our men. Owing to successive lines of the enemy following on
    closely there was the gravest danger that the flank of the whole
    position would be turned. Grasping the seriousness of the
    situation, Colonel Anderson made his way across the open in full
    view of the enemy now holding the wood on the right, and after
    much effort succeeded in gathering the remainder of the two
    right companies. He personally led the counter attack, and drove
    the enemy from the wood, capturing 12 machine guns and 70
    prisoners, and restoring the original line. His conduct in
    leading the charge was quite fearless, and his most splendid
    example was the means of rallying and inspiring the men during a
    most critical hour.

    "Later on in the same day the enemy had penetrated to within 300
    yards of the village, and were holding a timber yard in force.
    Colonel Anderson re-organised his men after they had been driven
    in, and brought them forward to a position of readiness for a
    counter-attack. He led the attack in person, and throughout
    showed the utmost disregard for his own safety. The
    counter-attack drove the enemy from his position, but resulted
    in this very gallant officer losing his life. He died fighting
    within the enemy's lines, setting a magnificent example to all
    who were privileged to serve under him."

    Among the first to join the 17th H.L.I. was Captain W.H.
    Anderson, a man widely known and highly respected in Glasgow
    social and business circles. He was with the Battalion during
    most of its training at Gailes and Troon, and before embarking
    for Service in France was gazetted as Major in the 19th H.L.I.
    He served with the same rank in the East Surreys till invalided
    home in March, 1917. On his return to France he was transferred
    to an H.L.I. Battalion, becoming Lieut.-Colonel, and shortly
    afterwards was killed in an attack at the head of his men of the
    12th H.L.I. as recorded above.


                 Sergeant JAMES Y. TURNBULL, V.C.

    It has been said of James Turnbull that he began to win his V.C.
    at Troon. He was a born leader, and always a fearless champion
    of fairplay. He towered above the average man in strength of
    character as he did in stature, and he was always the same
    unassuming and genial "Jimmy." He was a fitting embodiment of
    the ideals of the Seventeenth. A big man for a big occasion--and
    the big occasion came along on the 1st of July, 1916.

    The position of the Battalion was that of a wedge driven against
    the iron of impregnability, and the driving force suddenly
    withdrawn. At the thin end of the wedge Sergeant Turnbull, with
    a handful of men, performed prodigies of valour. From three
    sides enemy machine guns swept the position, snipers took deadly
    toll, and bombing attacks were constantly launched. Exposure
    meant almost certain death. The position was not only desperate;
    it was hopeless. Yet it was necessary to hold on till nightfall.
    It was a _man's_ job, and Turnbull filled the bill. He
    shouldered the responsibility as only a strong man could; and he
    organised the defence. He had to take countless risks, and was
    always where the fighting was fiercest. He was the indomitable
    leader and inspiring example. Wounded, he carried on till his
    last risk was taken, and he met a soldier's death towards the
    end of that fateful summer day.

    Of a band of heroes he was the beloved leader and super-hero.




Honours Gained by Officers and others while Serving with the
Battalion.


Extract from _The London Gazette_, dated 3/6/16.

    "To be additional member of the Third Class or Companion of the
    Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George.

               "Lieut.-Colonel D.S. Morton, V.D."


Military Cross.

                                                    Date of _Gazette_
+Lieut. A.J. BEGG,                                       30/ 5/16
 2nd Lieut. J.L. BRODIE,                                 26/ 5/17
+2nd Lieut. J.N. CARPENTER,                              30/ 5/16
 Lieut. A.N. DRYSDALE,                                   13/ 2/17
 Capt. F.E. DUNSMUIR,                                     1/ 1/18
 Lieut. J.L. M'CONNELL,                                  17/ 9/17
 2nd Lieut. W.M. MARTIN,                                 26/ 5/17
 Major G. R.S. PATERSON,                                 26/ 9/16
+Capt. JAS. RUSSELL,                                      1/ 1/17
 Capt. J.D. RUSSELL,                                     26/ 5/17
 2nd Lieut. D.G. THORBURN,                               18/ 6/17
 15214 R.Q.-M.S. W. DUNSMORE,                             1/ 1/17
 15394 C.S.M. A. MILLAR,                                  6/ 4/18

+ Since deceased.


Mentioned in Despatches.

_The London Gazette_, dated 15/6/16.
     Lieut.-Colonel D.S. MORTON, V.D.
     15205 Regt. S.M. J. KELLY.

_The London Gazette_, dated 4/1/17.
     +Capt. J.S. MARR.

_The London Gazette_, dated 25/5/17
     2nd Lieut. F.E. DUNSMUIR.
     16109 Sergt. W. WALLACE.

_The London Gazette_, dated 21/12/17.
     Major G.R.S. PATERSON, M.C.
     15510 Sergt. J.C. BRUCE.
     16084 Sergt. Y. GILBERT.
     16085 Pte. W. PARKER.


Distinguished Conduct Medal.

 15849 Sergt. W. FRASER,                                  1/ 1/18
  2797 Sergt. F. LEIPER,                                 13/ 2/17
 15866 C.S.M. W. MATHER,                                  1/ 1/17
+15507 C.S.M. S.D. REITH,                                30/ 5/16

+ Since deceased.


Bar to Military Medal.

+2997 Sergt. N. CONNOR, M.M.

+ Since deceased.


Military Medal.

                                                   Date of _Gazette_.

+23053 Pte. G.S. ANDERSON,                               26/ 5/17
 15255 Cpl. J. CHAPMAN,                                  10/11/16
+ 2997 Sergt. N. CONNOR,                                 16/ 2/17
 16004 Pte. J.K. DEANS,                                  16/ 2/17
 15973 L.-Sergt. W. DICKSON,                             17/ 9/17
 15937 Cpl. F. FARNELL,                                  17/ 9/17
 15582 L.-Cpl. A.V. FOLLETT,                             17/ 9/17
 40899 Pte. A.B. FORREST,                                17/ 9/17
 15581 Pte. C.N. FRASER,                                 16/ 2/17
 16084 Sergt. Y. GILBERT,                                16/ 2/17
  2727 L.-Cpl. W. GLENNIE,                               26/ 5/17
 41046 Pte. J. HOGG,                                     26/ 5/17
  2744 Pte. J.C. HUNTER,                                 20/10/16
  9808 Sergt. J. JOHNSTONE,                              26/ 5/17
  2797 Pte. F. LEIPER,                                    3/ 6/16
 15748 Sergt. F.M. M'GREGOR,                             16/ 2/17
+15720 Pte. D. MACINTOSH,                                 3/ 6/16
 15363 Pte. A.G. M'NAIR,                                 10/11/16
+15677 Sergt. J. MAXWELL,                                16/ 2/17
+16146 Sergt. R. MILLIGAN,                               29/ 8/17
+15964 Sergt. J. OSBORNE,                                16/ 2/17
 27267 L.-Cpl. J. PEARSON,                               26/ 5/17
  2725 L.-Sergt. J. RAMAGE,                              26/ 5/17
 41198 Pte. E. REDDINGTON,                               26/ 5/17
 15415 Sergt. T. RITCHIE,                                20/10/16
 15775 Sergt. J. ROBERTS,                                16/ 2/17
 28057 L.-Cpl. P. ROBERTSON,                             26/ 5/17
 43268 Pte. T. SCOTT,                                    16/ 2/17
 13688 Pte. R.J. SLOWEY,                                 16/ 2/17
 42378 Pte. P. SMITH,                                    26/ 5/17
 15956 C.Q.M.S. W. STEWART,                              16/ 2/17
+15458 Sergt. H.G. TAYLOR,                                3/ 6/16
 16149 Cpl. H. THORBURN,                                 26/ 5/17
 41607 Pte. D. TURNBULL,                                 18/ 6/17
 15938 Sergt. A.G. WATSON,                               16/ 2/17
 15818 Pte. R.M. WATSON,                                 16/ 2/17
 40530 Pte. J. WATT,                                     26/ 4/17
353079 Pte. F.S. WILLDER,                                17/ 9/17

+ Since deceased.


Meritorious Service Medal.

 15544 Sergt. M. CULLEN.
 16064 L.-Cpl. J. HUTTON, att. IV. Corps.
 15710 L.-Cpl. J.A. M'DOUGALL, 32nd Division.
 16169 Sergt. J.F. SINCLAIR, 97th Brigade.


Belgian Croix de Guerre.

 15310 C.S.M. G. HIRST.
 16109 C.Q.M.S. W. WALLACE.


  Honours Gained by Original Members of the Battalion
  after being Transferred to other Units.


Distinguished Service Order.

 Major G.R.S. PATERSON, 5th K.O.S.B.,
   formerly Major 17th H.L.I.

 Capt. J.D. YOUNG, 10th A. & S. Highlanders,
   formerly 2916 Pte. "B" Coy.


Bar to Military Cross.

 Lieut. J. CALLAN, M.C., 12th H.L.I.,
   formerly 15527 L.-Cpl., "A" Coy.

 Capt. A.W. DONALD, M.C., 252 Coy. R.E.,
   formerly 15200 L.-Cpl. "B" Coy.

+2nd Lieut. C.B. MEADOWS, M.C,
   King's Own Royal Lancashire Regiment,
   formerly 23015 Pte. "C" Coy.

+ Since deceased.


Military Cross.

 Lieut. R. ANDERSON, 13th Battalion Tank Corps,
   formerly 15832 Sergeant "A" Coy.

 Lieut. H.T. BAIRD, 447th Coy. R.E.,
   formerly 15509 Pte. "A" Coy.

 2nd LIEUT. A. BROWN, A. & S. Highlanders,
   formerly 16187 Pte. "C" Coy.

 Lieut. J. CALLAN, 12th H.L.I.,
   formerly 15527 L.-Cpl. "A" Coy.

 Lieut. S. CAMPBELL, 12th H.L.I.,
   formerly 15982 Pte. "C" Coy.

 Lieut. J.H. CARSWELL,
   1st Northumberland Fusiliers,
   formerly 2708 L.-Cpl. "B" Coy.

 Captain A.W. DONALD, 252nd Coy. R.E.,
   formerly 15200 L.-Cpl. "B" Coy.

 2nd Lieut. A.G. DRUMMOND, 6th Black Watch,
   formerly 23011 Pte. "A" Coy.

 2nd LIEUT. H.C. DAVIE,
   1/8th Battalion Scottish Rifles,
     formerly 15561 L.-Cpl. "C" Coy.

 Lieut. A.F. FERGUSON, H.L.I., attached R.A.F.,
   formerly 15282 C.Q.M.S. "A" Coy.

+2nd Lieut. E.L. GARVIE,
   9th H.L.I. (Glasgow Highlanders),
     formerly 2956 Pte. "B" Coy.

 Lieut. H.P. HADDOW, King's Royal Rifle Corps,
   formerly 15854 L.-Cpl. "A" Coy.

+Captain J.M. HAMILTON, Lancashire Fusiliers,
   formerly 2783 Pte. "B" Coy.

 Lieut. H. HENDERSON, Liverpool Scottish,
   formerly 16182 Sergt. "C" Coy.

 2nd Lieut. J.F. HOLMES, 9th Scottish Rifles,
   formerly 15856 Pte. "C" Coy.

 Lieut. J.L. JACK, Machine Gun Corps,
   formerly 2843 Pte. "C" Coy.

 Lieut. S.F. JOHNSTONE, Durham Light Infantry,
   formerly 15323 Cpl. "C" Coy.

 2nd Lieut H.W. JORDON,
   19th Durham Light Infantry,
     formerly 2698 L.-Cpl. "C" Coy.

 Staff-Capt. T.P. LOCKING, General List,
   formerly 15657 Sergt. "B" Coy.

 2nd Lieut. R. LOVE, 222nd Coy. R.E.,
   formerly 15336 Pte. "A" Coy.

 Capt. F.M. M'GREGOR, M.M., Northants Regiment,
   formerly 15748 Act.-C.S.M. "C" Coy.

+2nd Lieut. C.B. MEADOWS,
   King's Own Royal Lancashire Regiment,
     formerly 23015 Pte. "C" Coy.

 Lieut. A.A. MILLER,
   9th H.L.I. (Glasgow Highlanders),
     formerly 15680 Pte. "B" Coy.

+Lieut. J. MILLER, 7th A. & S. Highlanders,
   formerly 2970 Pte. A. & S.H. Cy.

 Capt. F.D. MORTON, 25th Royal Fusiliers,
   formerly Lieut. "C" Coy.

 Sub-Lieut. T.I. MORTON,
   "Anson" Battalion, R.N. Division,
     formerly 15693 "C" Coy.

 Capt. J.D. YOUNG, 10th A. & S. Highlanders,
   formerly 2916 Pte. "B" Coy.

+ Since deceased.


Member of the Order of the British Empire.

 Lieut. W. HOGG, Intelligence Corps,
   formerly 15629 Cpl. "B" Coy.


Distinguished Conduct Medal.

 34834 Sergt. T. GARMORY,
   8th York and Lancaster Regiment,
     formerly 2985 Pte. "D" Coy.

+22355 Sergt. J.A. WARK, Machine Gun Corps,
   formerly 15461 Pte. "B" Coy.


Military Medal.

 16018 Pte. R. HOOD, 2nd Battn. H.L.I.,
   formerly "D" Coy.

 15440 Cpl. W.P. STEEL, 8th York and Lancs.,
   formerly 15440 Pte. "B" Coy.

 34853 L.-Cpl. J.L. WILSON, 8th York and Lancs.,
  formerly 15813 Pte. "D" Coy.

+15583 Pte. R.D. FRAME, 2nd H.L.I.,
   formerly Pte. "C" Coy.

 15389 Cpl. D. MURRAY, 16th H.L.I.,
   formerly L.-Cpl. "B" Coy.

 15373 Sergt. F.J. M'CLUSKY, 2nd H.L.I.,
   formerly L.-Cpl., "A" Coy.

 ---- Sergt. A. M'AUSLAN, R.E.,
   formerly 15365 L.-Cpl. "A" Coy.

 16192 L.-Cpl. H. M'KILLOP, 16th H.L.I.,
   formerly L.-Cpl. "A" Coy.

+ Since deceased.


Every effort has been made by reference to the Battalion Records, by
advertising and otherwise, to make these lists complete. The Editors
will much regret should there be unfortunately any omissions.




  LIST OF OFFICERS who were granted Commissions in the
  Battalion on its formation and posted to Companies
  as shewn.


Lieut.-Colonel D.S. MORTON, V.D.


"A" Company.

  Major W.J. PAUL
   (_Commanding_).

 Captain W.W. MORTON.
 Lieut. R.T. NEILSON.
 Lieut. J.B. MACBRAYNE.
 Lieut. GARDNER.
 Lieut. G.R.S. PATERSON.


"B" Company.

  Major J.R. YOUNG
   (_Commanding_).

 Captain J. RUSSELL.
 Lieut. G.V.M. BOYD.
 Lieut. A.J. BEGG.
 2nd Lieut. R. SCOTT.


"C" Company.

  Major W. AULD, V.D.
   (_Commanding_).

 Captain W.H. ANDERSON.
 Lieut. A.J. FERGUSON.
 Lieut. F.D. MORTON.
 Lieut. A.S. MILLAR.
 Lieut J.S. SHARP.


"D" Company.

  Captain E. HUTCHISON
   (_Commanding_).

 Captain J. MCM. MITCHELL.
 2nd Lieut. P.G. SYMINGTON.
 Lieut. R.W. CASSELL.
 2nd Lieut. D. KITCHEN.
 Lieut. J.M. BROWN.

Lieut. and Quartermaster A.E. SLADE.

Lieut. D.R. KIRKPATRICK, R.A.M.C. (attached).


The Battalion was successively under the Command of:--

    Colonel D.S. MORTON, C.M.G., V.D.

    Lieut.-Colonel W.J. PAUL.

    Lieut.-Colonel F.R.F. SWORDER,
        Gordon Highlanders.

    Lieut.-Colonel J. INGLIS, C.M.G., D.S.O.,
        Highland Light Infantry.


     =The following "other ranks" of the Battalion
     were granted Commissions in the Battalion.=

2nd Lt. W.M. ALEXANDER,            _Killed in Action_,         1/ 7/16
2nd Lt. J.R. BECKETT,              _Wounded in Action_,        1/ 7/16
                                   _Died of Wounds_,           4/ 7/16
2nd Lt. J.L. BRODIE, M.C.,         To 15th H.L.I, on disbandment.
*2nd Lt. J.M. BROWN.                   --                        --
2nd Lt. J.N. CARPENTER, M.C.,      _Killed in Action_,         1/ 7/16
2nd Lt. J. CHAPMAN,                _Wounded in Action_,        1/ 7/16
*2nd Lt. H.C. COLVIL.                  --                        --
2nd Lt. P.N. CUNNINGHAM,           _Killed in Action_,         2/12/17
Captain E. DOBSON,                 _Killed in Action_,        10/ 7/17
Captain A.N. DRYSDALE, M.C.,       _Died of Wounds_,          15/ 4/17
Lieut. A.S. ELSWORTH,            { _Wounded in Action_,        1/ 7/16
                                 { _Wounded in Action_,         / 8/17
*2nd Lt. J.W. FRASER.                  --                        --
*2nd Lt. P.H. GRAHAM.                  --                        --
2nd Lt. G.G. HENDERSON,            _Killed in Action_,         6/ 8/16
*2nd Lt. H.G. HENDRY.                  --                        --
2nd Lt. W.A. HERRON,               _Wounded in Action_,         / 8/17
Lieut. JAS. KELLY, D.C.M.,             --                        --
2nd Lt. A.D. LAIRD,                _Killed in Action_,         1/ 7/16
Captain T.P. LOCKING,                  --                        --
Captain J.F. MORRISON,             _Killed in Action_,        18/11/16
Captain J.S. MARR,                 _Killed in Action_,        18/11/16
Captain H. M'ROBERT,               To General Staff (Staff Captain).
Captain J.L. M'CONNELL, M.C.,      To General List (Staff Captain).
2nd Lt. J.M. MACARTHUR,            To T.M. Battery
Captain A.G. MARSHALL,             _Killed in Action_,        12/ 2/17
*2nd Lt. H.R. ORR.                     --                        --
2nd Lt. J. OSBORNE,                _Killed in Action_,         2/12/17
2nd Lt. H.R. PEAT,                 _Wounded in Action_,       10/ 7/17
*2nd Lt. F.H. POOLEY.                  --                        --
*2nd Lt. F.A. RUSSELL.                 --                        --
2nd Lt. J.C. TODD,                 _Killed in Action_,        27/ 6/17
*2nd Lt. G.B. WALKER.                  --                        --
2nd Lt. C.S. WILLIAMSON,           _Wounded in Action_,         / 8/17
2nd Lt. D.G. YOUNGER,              _Killed in Action_,         1/ 7/16

* These Officers did not serve with the Battalion in France. The ranks
noted are those which they held previous to Embarkation.


     Roll of Warrant Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers and
     Men, who joined the Chamber of Commerce Battalion from 12th
     September, 1914, till Embarkation of Battalion, 22nd
     November, 1915.

All the undernoted joined the Battalion as Privates. The Ranks shown
are those attained previous to Embarkation.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  15200   | L.-Corpl.       | Donald, Alex. Watt.
  15201   | Pte.            | Buchanan, Joseph Robt.
  15202   | Pte.            | Pert, David.
  15203   | Pte.            | Love, Alan.
  15204   | Sergt.          | Todd, Matthew G.
  15205   | R.S.M.          | Kelly, J.
  15206   | R.Q.M.S.        | Keith, T.
  15207   | O.R./Q.M.S.     | Copland, J.
  15208   | Pte.            | Anderson, Wm.
  15209   | C.Q.M.S.        | Ferguson, A.W.
  15210   | C.S.M.          | M'Clusky, F.
  15211   | C.Q.M.S.        | Williams, E.A.
  15212   | C.S.M.          | Garrow, J.C.
  15213   | C.Q.M.S.        | Ferris, H.
  15214   | C.S.M.          | Dunsmore, W.
  15215   | C.Q.M.S.        | Core, T.M.
  15216   | C.S.M.          | Taylor, G.H.
  15217   | Pte.            | Seaton, James.
  15218   | Pte.            | Adam, Arthur Wm.
  15219   | Pte.            | Armstrong, John.
  15220   | Pte.            | Allan, Peter.
  15221   | Pte.            | Arthur, David.
  15222   | Pte.            | Anderson, Matthew.
  15223   | Pte.            | Anderson, Wm.
  15224   | Pte.            | Aitkenhead, R.T.
  15225   | Pte.            | Adam, Andrew Rolland.
  15226   | Pte.            | Angus, L.S.
  15227   | Pte.            | Allan, John.
  15228   | Pte.            | Allan, Wm. Taylor.
  15229   | Pte.            | Andrew, Wm.
  15230   | Pte.            | Blair, David A.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  15231   | Pte.            | Binnie, Jas. W.
  15232   | Pte.            | Brown, James.
  15233   | L.-Sergt.       | Baxter, Alex. C.
  15234   | Pte.            | Bates, John R.
  15235   | Pte.            | Brown, Alex.
  15236   | Pte.            | Barr, Rich.
  15237   | Pte.            | Brown, T.J.
  15238   | Pte.            | Booth, Charles.
  15239   | Pte.            | Binnie, David W.
  15240   | Pte.            | Barr, F.C.G.
  15241   | Pte.            | Burgess, James.
  15242   | Pte.            | Baxter, Wm.
  15243   | Pte.            | Campbell, B. M'C.
  15244   | Pte.            | Clark, J.N.P.
  15245   | Pte.            | Calder, Alex.
  15246   | Sergt.          | Cochrane, J.C.
  15247   | Pte.            | Clark, James.
  15248   | Pte.            | Cox, C. Wm.
  15249   | Pte.            | Craig, R.B.
  15250   | Pte.            | Campbell, E.
  15251   | L.-Cpl.         | Cuthbert, Arthur.
  15252   | Pte.            | Cunninghame, Douglas.
  15253   | L.-Cpl.         | Coogan, Malcolm.
  15254   | Pte.            | Cuthbert, J.C.
  15255   | L.-Cpl.         | Chapman, John.
  15256   | Pte.            | Crombie, James.
  15257   | Pte.            | Caw, Wm.
  15258   | Pte.            | Collins, A.E.
  15259   | Sergt.          | Carnan, John.
  15260   | Pte.            | Currie, Neil T.
  15261   | Pte.            | Clark, Geo.
  15262   | Cpl.            | Drever, Wm.
  15263   | Cpl.            | Dobbie, Robt. Wm.
  15264   | L.-Sergt.       | Douglas, John.
  15265   | Pte.            | Donnelly, Wm. John.
  15266   | Pte.            | Deans, Geo. W.
  15267   | L.-Cpl.         | Dickson, Thomas P.
  15268   | Pte.            | Dow, Samuel Hugh.
  15269   | L.-Cpl.         | Dymock, H.M.
  15270   | Pte.            | Dunlop, Robt.
  15271   | Pte.            | White, T.W.D.
  15272   | Pte.            | Davidson, Thomas Y.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  15273   | L.-Cpl.         | Drysdale, Alex. O.
  15274   | Sergt.          | Drummond, Mark.
  15275   | Pte.            | Dingwall, R. M'F.
  15276   | Pte.            | Duncan, Robert G.
  15277   | Cpl.            | Fleming, John.
  15278   | Pte.            | Forrest, E.
  15279   | Pte.            | Findlay, David.
  15280   | Pte.            | Fortune, George R.
  15281   | Pte.            | Finlinson, Arthur B.
  15282   | A/C.Q.M.S.      | Ferguson, Alex.
  15283   | Pte.            | Frew, James Allen.
  15284   | Pte.            | Fraser, Alex.
  15285   | Pte.            | Fraser, Donald.
  15286   | L.-Sergt.       | Gowans, James.
  15287   | L.-Cpl.         | Grigsby, A.H.
  15288   | Pte.            | Gillespie, A.A.
  15289   | L.-Cpl.         | Gannaway, George Edward.
  15290   | Pte.            | Grigg, Stanley J.
  15291   | L.-Cpl.         | Gill, John.
  15292   | Pte.            | Goodall, Robert L.
  15293   | Pte.            | Gemmel, Alex.
  15294   | L.-Cpl.         | Glassford, Alex. S.
  15295   | L.-Cpl.         | Griffiths, J.L.
  15296   | Pte.            | Galloway, Charles.
  15297   | Pte.            | Gardiner, William.
  15298   | Pte.            | Gray, Alex.
  15299   | Pte.            | Gudgeon, Thomas W.
  15300   | Pte.            | Gibbon, Edward.
  15301   | Pte.            | Graham, William R.
  15302   | Pte.            | Gowans, Alex.
  15303   | L.-Cpl.         | Haddow, Robert B.
  15304   | Pte.            | Hovell, Alex.
  15305   | Pte.            | Haddon, R. M'K.
  15306   | Pte.            | Henderson, Robert.
  15307   | Pte.            | Highet, Andrew.
  15308   | Pte.            | Horsley, B.T.
  15309   | Pte.            | Herbert, Peter C.
  15310   | L.-Cpl.         | Hirst, George.
  15311   | Pte.            | Hay, Neil T.
  15312   | Pte.            | Hyslop, William.
  15313   | Pte.            | Hubbard, William.
  15314   | Pte.            | Hutchison, William Ramsay.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  15315   | L.-Cpl.         | Hutton, David.
  15316   | Pte.            | Hagen, John.
  15317   | Pte.            | Hunter, John Wilson.
  15318   | Pte.            | Hay, John.
  15319   | Sergt.          | Hamilton, John.
  15320   | Pte.            | Hardie, Gordon D.
  15321   | Pte.            | Herbert, Morris.
  15322   | Pte.            | Hemphill, Archibald.
  15323   | Pte.            | Johnston, Samuel.
  15324   | Pte.            | Johnstone, Robert M.
  15325   | L.-Cpl.         | Jackson, David.
  15326   | Pte.            | Jarvie, William Robert.
  15327   | Pte.            | Jackson, John A.
  15328   | Pte.            | Johnstone, Kenneth.
  15329   | Pte.            | Inglis, John.
  15330   | Pte.            | Kelly, Thomas.
  15331   | Pte.            | Liddell, George.
  15332   | Pte.            | Livingstone, James H.
  15333   | Pte.            | Lochhead, Robert Allan.
  15334   | Pte.            | Lorimer, John William.
  15335   | Pte.            | Livingston, Alex. Bryson.
  15336   | Pte.            | Love, Robert.
  15337   | Pte.            | Lyons, John M.
  15338   | Pte.            | Morrison, James F.
  15339   | Pte.            | Morrison, James Smith.
  15340   | Pte.            | Miller, John.
  15341   | Pte.            | Milne, William.
  15342   | L.-Cpl.         | Murdoch, William.
  15343   | Pte.            | Munro, Hector.
  15344   | Pte.            | Muir, D.L.
  15345   | Pte.            | Muir, Robert E.R.
  15346   | L.-Cpl.         | M'Callum, Colin.
  15347   | Pte.            | M'Aulay, Archibald.
  15348   | L.-Sergt.       | M'Naught, James.
  15349   | Pte.            | M'Millan, Daniel.
  15350   | Pte.            | M'Kendrick, Alex.
  15351   | Sergt.          | M'Letchie, John B.
  15352   | Pte.            | M'Leod, Alex. G.
  15353   | Pte.            | M'Murtrie, Dougald M'K.
  15354   | L.-Cpl.         | M'Gregor, James R.
  15355   | Pte.            | Macdonald, John Grant.
  15356   | Pte.            | M'Neil, Joseph.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  15357   | Pte.            | McLauchlan, John H.
  15358   | Pte.            | MacDougall, Duncan.
  15359   | Pte.            | M'Taggart, Duncan.
  15360   | Pte.            | M'Crone, Robert.
  15361   | Pte.            | MacAllan, Thomas Alex.
  15362   | Pte.            | M'Farlane, James.
  15363   | Pte.            | M'Nair, Allan Gilmour.
  15364   | Pte.            | M'Lean, Hugh.
  15365   | L.-Cpl.         | M'Auslan, Alex.
  15366   | Pte.            | M'Dougall, Peter.
  15367   | Sergt.          | M'Taggart, William Kerr.
  15368   | Pte.            | M'Neill, James.
  15369   | Pte.            | M'Lachlan, Louis Alex.
  15370   | Pte.            | M'Hugh, Matthew.
  15371   | Pte.            | M'Vake, Robert.
  15372   | Pte.            | M'Garrity, Michael.
  15373   | L.-Cpl.         | M'Clusky, F. John.
  15374   | Pte.            | M'Phail, John.
  15375   | Sergt.          | M'Arthur, John M'L.
  15376   | Pte.            | M'Naught, Duncan.
  15377   | Pte.            | M'Neil, Charles M'G.
  15378   | Pte.            | M'Corquodale, Archibald.
  15379   | Pte.            | M'Meechan, David Cowan.
  15380   | Cpl.            | M'Williams, J.
  15381   | Pte.            | M'Culloch, George Neil.
  15382   | Sergt.          | M'Gibbon, William.
  15383   | Pte.            | Munro, Alex. M'L.
  15384   | Pte.            | Miller, David.
  15385   | Pte.            | Munro, John.
  15386   | Pte.            | Morrison, Donald.
  15387   | L.-Cpl.         | Marshall, Allan Gow.
  15388   | Pte.            | Mailer, Andrew.
  15389   | Pte.            | Murray, David.
  15390   | Pte.            | Mowat, John Watt.
  15391   | Pte.            | Morrison, Andrew.
  15392   | Pte.            | Miller, James.
  15393   | Pte.            | Maitland, William.
  15394   | Pte.            | Millar, Angus.
  15395   | Cpl.            | Miller, James.
  15396   | L.-Cpl.         | Martin, David.
  15397   | Pte.            | Morrison, Robert.
  15398   | Pte.            | May, William Walker.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  15399   | L.-Cpl.         | Maxwell, Claude.
  15400   | Pte.            | Meek, George.
  15401   | Pte.            | Muir, James.
  15402   | Pte.            | Milner, Thomas.
  15403   | L.-Sergt.       | Milne, James Wallace.
  15404   | Sergt.          | May, C.S.
  15405   | Pte.            | Menzies, Peter D.
  15406   | Pte.            | Orr, John Leslie.
  15407   | Pte.            | Pinkerton, Gavin.
  15408   | Pte.            | Paterson, Robert.
  15409   | Pte.            | Philp, Robert C.P.
  15410   | Pte.            | Paterson, John.
  15411   | Pte.            | Pattison, Robert M'P.
  15412   | Pte.            | Phillips, Alexander R.H.
  15413   | Pte.            | Preston, William Parker.
  15414   | L.-Cpl.         | Palmer, C.L.
  15415   | Sergt.          | Ritchie, Thomas.
  15416   | L.-Cpl.         | Robertson, George Tennant.
  15417   | Pte.            | Ritchie, William.
  15418   | Sergt.          | Robertson, John S.
  15419   | L.-Cpl.         | Reid, Donald M.
  15420   | Pte.            | Russell, William.
  15421   | Pte.            | Roy, George Allan.
  15422   | Pte.            | Ritchie, Robert F.
  15423   | Pte.            | Rogers, David Anderson.
  15424   | Pte.            | Russell, Samuel.
  15425   | L.-Cpl.         | Rait, Patrick W.
  15426   | Pte.            | Spence, Telford.
  15427   | Pte.            | Slater, Albert Ernest.
  15428   | Pte.            | Stuart, Charles M'D.
  15429   | Pte.            | Scott, William James.
  15430   | Pte.            | Somerville, James.
  15431   | Pte.            | Struthers, Hugh E.
  15432   | Pte.            | Scott, George K.
  15433   | Pte.            | Stark, David.
  15434   | Pte.            | Sutherland, Thomas N.
  15435   | Pte.            | Scott, Joe.
  15436   | Pte.            | Strachan, Andrew R.
  15437   | Cpl.            | Scott, Archibald.
  15438   | Pte.            | Stokes, Arthur C.
  15439   | Pte.            | Swan, Allan.
  15440   | Pte.            | Steel, W.P.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  15441   | Pte.            | Stewart, John C.
  15442   | Cpl.            | Stevenson, John.
  15443   | Pte.            | Scott, William.
  15444   | Pte.            | Simpson, Walter.
  15445   | Pte.            | Scott, William P.
  15446   | Pte.            | Scott, Robert Neil.
  15447   | Pte.            | Samuels, James M.
  15448   | Pte.            | Small, Samuel.
  15449   | Sergt.          | Sanders, Sydney T.
  15450   | Pte.            | Thomson, John Hill.
  15451   | Pte.            | Torrance, E.
  15452   | Cpl.            | Timpson, Charles.
  15453   | Pte.            | Thomson, James.
  15454   | Pte.            | Thomson, David M.
  15455   | Sergt.          | Thomson, H.W.H.
  15456   | Sergt.          | Thomson, William James.
  15457   | Pte.            | Turnbull, George King.
  15458   | Sergt.          | Taylor, Herbert G.
  15459   | Pte.            | Thom, Matthew F.
  15460   | L.-Sergt.       | Taylor, David Alex.
  15461   | Pte.            | Wark, James Allen.
  15462   | Pte.            | Wallace, John.
  15463   | Pte.            | Warnock, James.
  15464   | Sergt.          | Watts, Frank M.W.
  15465   | Sergt.          | Woyka, Alex. G.
  15466   | Cpl.            | Wyman, Sydney.
  15467   | Sergt.          | Wishart, Alfred.
  15468   | Pte.            | Bruce, Thomas.
  15469   | Pte.            | Webster, James.
  15470   | Sergt.          | Watson, John.
  15471   | Pte.            | Waterman, R.
  15472   | Pte.            | Willock, Thos. B.
  15473   | Pte.            | Wallace, Robert Kerr.
  15474   | Pte.            | Young, William.
  15475   | Pte.            | Young, Robert.
  15476   | Pte.            | Finlayson, William Thomson.
  15477   | Pte.            | Atkinson, William.
  15478   | Pte.            | Alexander, W.M.
  15479   | Pte.            | Alexander, Walter.
  15480   | Pte.            | Angus, Thomas C.
  15481   | Cpl.            | Abercromby, Archibald Alex.
  15482   | Pte.            | Alston, James.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  15483   | Pte.            | Arbuckle, Alex.
  15484   | Pte.            | M'Arthur, Alex.
  15485   | Sergt.          | Angus, William Clark.
  15486   | Pte.            | Atkins, William J.L.
  15487   | L.-Cpl.         | Allan, James.
  15488   | Pte.            | Andrews, Matthew M'Kay.
  15489   | Pte.            | Biggs, Frank A.
  15490   | Pte.            | Bennett, James S.
  15491   | Pte.            | Crawford, Matthew.
  15492   | L.-Cpl.         | Black, Alex.
  15493   | Pte.            | Barron, John F.
  15494   | Pte.            | Broadhead, John R.
  15495   | Pte.            | Baxter, David John.
  15496   | Pte.            | Ballantyne, Francis.
  15497   | Pte.            | Burleigh, John.
  15498   | Pte.            | Bryce, Thomas.
  15499   | Pte.            | Barkley, Martin Bell.
  15500   | Pte.            | Barclay, John.
  15501   | Pte.            | Barton, Alex. Baird.
  15502   | Pte.            | Broadhead, Alex. G.
  15503   | Pte.            | Bailley, William N.
  15504   | Pte.            | Brown, John M'D.
  15505   | Pte.            | Barton, Robert L.
  15506   | Pte.            | Borthwick, H.H.
  15507   | A/C.S.M.        | Reith, Stephen D.
  15508   | Pte.            | Bebbington, John Vernon.
  15509   | Pte.            | Baird, H. Thompson.
  15510   | Pte.            | Bruce, John Charles.
  15511   | Pte.            | Provan, George.
  15512   | Pte.            | Brooke, Robert L.
  15513   | Pte.            | Buchanan, Robert W.H.
  15514   | Pte.            | Buchanan, William.
  15515   | Pte.            | Bailley, A.R.
  15516   | A/C.S.M.        | Ballantyne, William N.
  15517   | Sergt.          | Brown, William P.
  15518   | Cpl.            | Brown, Robert S.
  15519   | Pte.            | Cameron, Alexander.
  15520   | Sergt.          | Drummond, William.
  15521   | Pte.            | Drysdale, Alex. N.
  15522   | Pte.            | Dobson, Edward.
  15523   | L.-Sergt.       | Dunlop, James.
  15524   | L.-Cpl.         | Carswell, John C.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  15525   | Pte.            | Duncan, Thomas.
  15526   | Pte.            | Crockett, George P.
  15527   | L.-Cpl.         | Callan, John.
  15528   | Pte.            | Cameron, Malcolm C.
  15529   | Pte.            | Cooper, William.
  15530   | Pte.            | Craig, James M.
  15531   | Pte.            | Cowan, John.
  15532   | Pte.            | Carpenter, John M.
  15533   | Pte.            | Curie, Robert.
  15534   | Pte.            | Chalmers, Thomas M.
  15535   | L.-Sergt.       | Cook, Thomas.
  15536   | Sig.-Cpl.       | Craig, Thomas.
  15537   | Pte.            | Fleming, Harry C.
  15538   | Pte.            | M'Intyre, D.C.
  15539   | Pte.            | Crombie, Robt. A.
  15540   | Pte.            | Campbell, Thomas C.
  15541   | Pte.            | Cross, Archibald David.
  15542   | Pte.            | Cruickshank, Alex. A.
  15543   | Pte.            | Channing, H.H.
  15544   | L.-Cpl.         | Cullen, Matthew.
  15545   | Pte.            | Campbell, William T.
  15546   | Pte.            | Christison, Robert Colin.
  15547   | Cpl.            | Crocker, John.
  15548   | Pte.            | Cameron, Alex. C.
  15549   | Pte.            | Cumming, A. Smith.
  15550   | L.-Sergt.       | Cuthbertson, Charles S.
  15551   | Pte.            | Craig, Thomas.
  15552   | L.-Cpl.         | Craig, A.B.
  15553   | Pte.            | Craig, John.
  15554   | L.-Cpl.         | Crawford, Thomas.
  15555   | L.-Cpl.         | Corbett, William S.
  15556   | Pte.            | Crinean, Charles.
  15557   | Pte.            | Carmichael, James A.
  15558   | Cpl.            | Davidson, Albert.
  15559   | Cpl.            | Davidson, John.
  15560   | Pte.            | Dawes, Harry E.
  15561   | L.-Cpl.         | Davie, Harry Craig.
  15562   | Pte.            | Dunsmuir, A.G.
  15563   | Pte.            | Dow, William John.
  15564   | Pte.            | Dixon, Charles.
  15565   | Pte.            | Dott, Robert Wilson.
  15566   | Cpl.            | Erskine, Ralph.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  15567   | Pte.            | Elliot, James Kirk.
  15568   | Pte.            | Elsworth, A.S.
  15569   | Sergt.          | Ellery, Albert Charles.
  15570   | Pte.            | Eggert, Walter.
  15571   | Pte.            | Edmond, George G.
  15572   | Pte.            | Fisher, Thomas C.
  15573   | Pte.            | Fleming, John J.
  15574   | L.-Sergt.       | Fraser, Samuel.
  15575   | Pte.            | Fergus, Robert B.
  15576   | Pte.            | Forrest, Archibald.
  15577   | Pte.            | Frame, William D.
  15578   | Pte.            | Foulger, Horace William.
  15579   | Pte.            | Freeman, Michael.
  15580   | Pte.            | Fraser, James W.
  15581   | Pte.            | Fraser, Campbell N.
  15582   | Pte.            | Follett, Arthur V.
  15583   | Pte.            | Frame, Robert D.
  15584   | Pte.            | Ferguson, Hume.
  15585   | Pte.            | Freeland, Thomas S.
  15586   | Pte.            | Fleming, Allan.
  15587   | Pte.            | Falconer, J. Alex.
  15588   | L.-Sergt.       | Fullerton, William L.
  15589   | Pte.            | Flintoff, R. Alex.
  15590   | Pte.            | Ford, William Graham.
  15591   | Pte.            | Fraser, William Alex.
  15592   | Pte.            | Finlayson, James.
  15593   | Pte.            | Garrioch, Alex.
  15594   | L.-Cpl.         | Gray, Donald.
  15595   | Pte.            | Galloway, John H.
  15596   | L.-Cpl.         | Greig, Gilbert.
  15597   | Pte.            | Guthrie, Robert Yates.
  15598   | Pte.            | Gauld, Ernest G.
  15599   | Pte.            | Graham, Patrick H.
  15600   | Pte.            | Graham, William.
  15601   | Pte.            | Garrioch, J. M'K.
  15602   | Pte.            | Graham, George.
  15603   | Pte.            | Gilfillan, William.
  15604   | Pte.            | Galt, Adam.
  15605   | Pte.            | Gibson, Allan D.
  15606   | L.-Cpl.         | Deans, A. Gibson.
  15607   | Pte.            | Grandison, Arthur A.
  15608   | Pte.            | Gemmell, A.S.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  15610   | Pte.            | Gray, Robert Love.
  15611   | Pte.            | Hamilton, James.
  15612   | Pte.            | Hutchison, George M'F.
  15613   | Pte.            | Hall, David S.
  15614   | Pte.            | Henderson, George G.
  15615   | L.-Cpl.         | Hamilton, William.
  15616   | Pte.            | Hamilton, Samuel.
  15617   | Pte.            | Hamilton, William John.
  15618   | Pte.            | Henderson, James.
  15619   | Pte.            | Hutton, John Graham.
  15620   | Pte.            | Haddow, John Haig.
  15621   | L.-Cpl.         | Hunter, James Crawford.
  15622   | Pte.            | Harper, John M.
  15623   | Pte.            | Herron, William A.
  15624   | Pte.            | Horne, Walter D.
  15625   | Pte.            | Hamilton, William.
  15626   | Sergt.          | Haft, Julian.
  15627   | Pte.            | Houstoun, Alexander G.
  15628   | L.-Cpl.         | Harvie, Alex. W.
  15629   | Cpl.            | Hogg, William.
  15630   | Pte.            | Hutchison, James M.
  15631   | Pte.            | Hutcheson, Thomas.
  15632   | Pte.            | Howie, Kenneth M.
  15633   | L.-Cpl.         | Hamilton, J.F.
  15634   | Cpl.            | Henderson, Robert.
  15635   | Pte.            | Howie, John Love.
  15636   | Pte.            | Haggerty, Thomas.
  15637   | Pte.            | Imrie, Frank M.
  15638   | Pte.            | Irvine, Alex. Garven.
  15639   | Pte.            | Inrig, Alex. George.
  15640   | Pte.            | Jenkins, John B.
  15641   | Pte.            | Kean, James M'Lean.
  15642   | Pte.            | Kinloch, Peter S.
  15643   | Pte.            | Kerr, Andrew A.
  15644   | Pte.            | Kinghorn, Arthur A.A.
  15645   | Pte.            | Kennedy, James.
  15646   | L.-Cpl.         | Keast, Norman R.
  15647   | Pte.            | Knight, Alex.
  15648   | Cpl.            | Kedslie, John Kay.
  15649   | Sergt.          | Kennedy, David.
  15650   | L.-Cpl.         | Lothian, William.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  15651   | L.-Cpl.         | Leask, Andrew D.
  15652   | Pte.            | Munro, Thomas A.
  15653   | Cpl.            | Miller, Alex. L.
  15654   | Pte.            | Marr, James Scott.
  15655   | Cpl.            | Lindsay, Douglas A.B.
  15656   | Pte.            | Love, David A.
  15657   | Sergt.          | Locking, Thomas P.
  15658   | Pte.            | Lucas, Charles Walker.
  15659   | Pte.            | Leckie, Robert G.
  15660   | Pte.            | Laird, Arthur D.
  15661   | Pte.            | Linn, William Gemmell.
  15662   | L.-Cpl.         | Leishman, Thomas.
  15663   | Pte.            | Livie, John Fletcher.
  15664   | Sergt.          | Lang, Archibald.
  15665   | Pte.            | Lindsay, John Caird.
  15666   | Pte.            | Love, Alex. James.
  15667   | Pte.            | Lawson, H. Gibson.
  15668   | Pte.            | Levy, Barnet.
  15669   | Pte.            | Locke, Norman.
  15670   | L.-Cpl.         | Lees, Charles.
  15671   | L.-Cpl.         | Moses, James.
  15672   | Pte.            | Miller, Davie.
  15673   | Pte.            | Maitland, Alex. M'Lean.
  15674   | L.-Cpl.         | More, James.
  15675   | Pte.            | Miller, George.
  15676   | Sergt.          | Marshall, John.
  15677   | Sergt.          | Maxwell, Joseph.
  15678   | Pte.            | Murray, Charles De B.
  15679   | Pte.            | Murray, Archibald William.
  15680   | Pte.            | Miller, Archibald A.
  15681   | Pte.            | Murdoch, Robert.
  15682   | L.-Cpl.         | Mackin, Stephen James.
  15683   | Pte.            | Moir, Alex. Hamilton.
  15684   | Pte.            | Morton, John T.K.
  15685   | L.-Sergt.       | Miller, James Alex.
  15686   | Cpl.            | Murray, Thomas H.
  15687   | L.-Cpl.         | Murdoch, Archibald.
  15688   | Pte.            | Miller, Arthur T.
  15689   | Pte.            | Melville, David W.
  15690   | Pte.            | Mills, Duncan B.
  15691   | Pte.            | Mills, David M'A.
  15692   | Sergt.          | Morrison, Thomas E.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  15693   | Pte.            | Morton, Thomas I.
  15694   | Pte.            | Miller, John.
  15695   | Pte.            | Miller, Alex. Hume.
  15696   | Pte.            | M'Naughton, Callum Arthur.
  15697   | Pte.            | M'Millan, William A.
  15698   | L.-Cpl.         | M'Gibbon, John.
  15699   | Pte.            | M'Feat, Fred.
  15700   | Pte.            | M'Aviney, James.
  15701   | Pte.            | M'Lelland, George H.
  15702   | Sig.-Sergt.     | M'Intosh, John R.
  15703   | Pte.            | M'Gavin, Colin M'K.
  15704   | Pte.            | MacMillan, Donald D.
  15705   | Pte.            | M'Crae, James.
  15706   | Pte.            | MacMillan, John.
  15707   | Pte.            | Macdonald, James.
  15708   | L.-Cpl.         | MacDougall, Charles S.
  15709   | Pte.            | M'Connell, John L.
  15710   | Pte.            | MacDougall, John A.
  15711   | Pte.            | M'Donald, Duncan.
  15712   | Sergt.          | MacMillan, Alex.
  15713   | Cpl.            | M'Culloch, W.
  15714   | Pte.            | M'Auley, Robert.
  15715   | Pte.            | M'Nicol, James F.
  15716   | Pte.            | M'Leod, Donald M'K.
  15717   | Cpl.            | M'Arthur, Neil M'C.
  15718   | Pte.            | M'Gee, Gilmour Brown.
  15719   | Pte.            | M'Arthur, Hugh.
  15720   | Pte.            | M'Intosh, Donald.
  15721   | Pte.            | Clark, Robert O.
  15722   | Sergt.          | M'Andrew, William.
  15723   | Pte.            | Provan, George Weir.
  15724   | L.-Sergt.       | M'Kenzie, E.P.
  15725   | Pte.            | Bull, Harold.
  15726   | L.-Cpl.         | Scott, W.P.
  15727   | Pte.            | Grandison, William A.
  15728   | Pte.            | M'Lintock, Hugh C.
  15729   | Pte.            | Baird, John.
  15730   | L.-Cpl.         | Young, John R.
  15731   | Pte.            | Adamson, Thomas N.
  15732   | Pte.            | Dawson, John.
  15733   | Pte.            | M'Dougall, Alan.
  15734   | L.-Cpl.         | Norris, James H.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  15735   | Pte.            | Neilson, William George.
  15736   | Pte.            | Orr, Harry Ross.
  15737   | Pte.            | Purdie, John D.
  15738   | Pte.            | Paterson, G.K.
  15739   | Pte.            | Pollock, William G.
  15740   | Pte.            | Pearson, William L.
  15741   | Pte.            | Younger, David G.
  15742   | L.-Cpl.         | M'Rae, Donald.
  15743   | Pte.            | MacGregor, William D.
  15744   | Pte.            | Watson, William O.
  15745   | Pte.            | Wilson, Allan Jackson.
  15746   | Pte.            | Macpherson, Angus.
  15747   | Pte.            | Mackinley, Alex. W.
  15748   | Sergt.          | MacGregor, Fred. M.
  15749   | Pte.            | M'Robbie, David H.
  15750   | Pte.            | M'Houll, K.
  15751   | Pte.            | M'Phail, Thomas W.
  15752   | L.-Cpl.         | M'Intyre, James.
  15753   | L.-Cpl.         | M'Gavin, N.P.
  15754   | Pte.            | Paul, Robert M'L.
  15755   | L.-Cpl.         | Pyper, Henry James.
  15756   | L.-Cpl.         | Pickering, Robert Y.
  15757   | Pte.            | Paterson, Robert.
  15758   | Pte.            | Paterson, George M.
  15759   | Pte.            | Purdie, William.
  15760   | Pte.            | Robertson, William B.
  15761   | Pte.            | Russell, H. M'P.
  15762   | Pte.            | Rogerson, James Muir.
  15763   | Pte.            | Rudd, David H.
  15764   | Pte.            | Riley, Thomas D.
  15765   | Pte.            | Rogerson, John Elliot.
  15766   | Pte.            | Robertson, William Telfer.
  15767   | Pte.            | M'Rorie, Robert.
  15768   | L.-Cpl.         | Rolland, Charles D.
  15769   | Cpl.            | Russell, Fred. Alex.
  15770   | Pte.            | Rose, John Alex.
  15771   | Pte.            | Ross, James.
  15772   | L.-Cpl.         | Robertson, Robert Speirs.
  15773   | Pte.            | Rankin, Colin.
  15774   | Pte.            | Roper, William H.
  15775   | Cpl.            | Roberts, John.
  15776   | Pte.            | Robertson, David.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  15777   | Pte.            | Roxburgh, Thomas L.
  15778   | Pte.            | Muir, Norman R.
  15779   | Pte.            | Ritchie, Edgar.
  15780   | Pte.            | Ritchie, William Stewart.
  15781   | Pte.            | Reid, William Hamilton.
  15782   | Pte.            | Spence, Donald W.
  15783   | A/C.S.M.        | Sturton, James.
  15784   | Pte.            | Smith, William Edward.
  15785   | Sergt.          | West, John.
  15786   | Cpl.            | Shannon, Andrew A.
  15787   | Pte.            | Stark, Robert L.
  15788   | Pte.            | Smellie, John.
  15789   | Pte.            | Sprott, Samuel.
  15790   | Pte.            | Stark, James T.
  15791   | Pte.            | Steel, David F.
  15792   | Pte.            | Sterling, John L.
  15793   | Pte.            | Scouler, James Tott.
  15794   | Pte.            | Sloan, Allan T.
  15795   | Pte.            | Stewart, George R.
  15796   | Pte.            | Stevenson, William.
  15797   | Pte.            | Scott, Robert Spence.
  15798   | Cpl.            | Stirling, Archibald B.
  15799   | Pte.            | Stroud, E.H.N.
  15800   | L.-Cpl.         | Smillie, James M'G.
  15801   | Pte.            | Scott, Walter.
  15802   | Pte.            | Stewart, Duncan H.
  15803   | Pte.            | Taggart, Henry R.
  15804   | Pte.            | Tough, Thomas S.
  15805   | L.-Sergt.       | Thomson, James C.
  15806   | Cpl.            | Terrie, Andrew Black.
  15807   | Pte.            | Turnbull, Thomas.
  15808   | Pte.            | Wood, Duncan B.
  15809   | Pte.            | Warren, A.B.
  15810   | Pte.            | Wurr, Herbert Joseph.
  15811   | Pte.            | Walker, Norman M.L.
  15812   | Pte.            | Wright, William B.
  15813   | Pte.            | Wilson, James L.
  15814   | Pte.            | Walker, Alexander.
  15815   | Pte.            | White, John B.
  15816   | Pte.            | Walker, Ernest G.
  15817   | Pte.            | White, George.
  15818   | Pte.            | Watson, Robert M'L.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  15819   | L.-Sergt.       | Wingate, James L.
  15820   | Pte.            | Welsh, Thomas Morrison.
  15821   | Pte.            | Wilson, A.K.
  15822   | Pte.            | Westwater, Donald U.
  15823   | Pte.            | Wilson, Henry.
  15824   | Pte.            | Watson, William N.
  15825   | Pte.            | Walker, George B.
  15826   | Pte.            | Wilson, Robert C.
  15827   | L.-Cpl.         | Waugh, Thomas.
  15828   | Pte.            | Young, James B.
  15829   | Pte.            | Young, John.
  15830   | Pte.            | Yuill, L.
  15831   | Pte.            | Young, Alex.
  15832   | L.-Sergt.       | Anderson, Robert.
  15833   | Pte.            | Allan, James.
  15834   | Pte.            | Barbour, John.
  15835   | Pte.            | Bowman, Joseph W.
  15836   | Pte.            | Brown, J. Lindsay.
  15837   | Pte.            | Baird, James.
  15838   | Pte.            | Beckett, James R.
  15839   | L.-Cpl.         | Brownlie, James M'H.
  15840   | Pte.            | Carson, F.R.
  15841   | Sergt.          | Cohen, Arthur M.
  15842   | Pte.            | Cowley, Victor.
  15843   | Sergt.          | Cowden, Alex.
  15844   | Pte.            | Dixon, Wilfrid.
  15845   | C.S.M.          | Dobbie, William.
  15846   | Pte.            | Finlay, John.
  15847   | Pte.            | Forrest, George.
  15848   | Pte.            | Fulton, C.S.
  15849   | Trans. Sergt.   | Fraser, Walter.
  15850   | Pte.            | Graham, Alex. H.
  15851   | Pte.            | Grant, Kenneth.
  15852   | Pte.            | Gibb, Thomas.
  15853   | Pte.            | Grassick, Charles A.
  15854   | Pte.            | Haddow, Hugh P.
  15855   | Pte.            | Hill, Sydney Thomas.
  15856   | Pte.            | Holmes, James.
  15857   | Cpl.            | Houston, William.
  15858   | Pte.            | Inglis, Robert.
  15859   | Pte.            | Jones, G. Philip.
  15860   | Pte.            | Leask, Ralph.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  15861   | Pte.            | Leckie, Andrew.
  15862   | Pte.            | Learmond, Victor.
  15863   | Pte.            | Mackie, Robert Neil.
  15864   | L.-Cpl.         | MacKay, John.
  15865   | Pte.            | MacRobert, Harry.
  15866   | Sergt.          | Mather, W.
  15867   | Pte.            | Moreland, Joseph.
  15868   | Pte.            | Millar, James.
  15869   | Pte.            | Morton, James G.
  15870   | Pte.            | M'Kenzie, M.A.
  15871   | Pte.            | M'Kee, Robert.
  15872   | Pte.            | M'Kelvie, Andrew.
  15873   | Pte.            | M'Kinnon, Donald.
  15874   | Pte.            | Palmer, Ernest.
  15875   | Sergt.          | Paterson, Duncan.
  15876   | L.-Cpl.         | Pyper, James F.
  15877   | Pte.            | Reid, David.
  15878   | Pte.            | Rhind, Andrew.
  15879   | Pte.            | Richardson, James W.
  15880   | Pte.            | Ritchie, John Allan.
  15881   | Pte.            | Robertson, James.
  15882   | Pte.            | Russell, George C.
  15883   | Pte.            | Rutherford, Edward P.
  15884   | Cpl.            | Cameron, David D.
  15885   | Pte.            | Stewart, William.
  15886   | T./Sergt.       | Summers, Alan Y.
  15887   | Pte.            | Thomson, Robert.
  15888   | Sergt.          | Turnbull, J.Y.
  15889   | Pte.            | Watson, Alex.
  15890   | Pte.            | Watson, Peter S.
  15891   | Pte.            | Wood, John Hamilton.
  15892   | Pte.            | Wilson, Robert B.
  15893   | Pte.            | Ramage, Peter.
  15894   | Pte.            | Stevens, Montague.
  15895   | Pte.            | Mossman, William.
  15896   | L.-Cpl.         | Wright, Colin S.
  15897   | Pte.            | Harvey, Edward A.
  15898   | Pte.            | Kirkpatrick, Arthur J.
  15899   | Pte.            | Kie, George.
  15900   | Pte.            | Walker, Thomas.
  15901   | Cpl.            | Mann, R.G.
  15902   | Pte.            | Meldrum, George.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  15903   | Pte.            | Hunter, Matthew C.
  15904   | Sergt.          | Abercrombie, H. M'P.
  15905   | Pte.            | Kelly, James.
  15906   | Pte.            | Waugh, Robert.
  15907   | Pte.            | Pettigrew, William.
  15908   | Pte.            | Connell, Archibald.
  15909   | S./Sergt.       | Duffus, Hugh W.
  15910   | Pte.            | Baines, Donald.
  15911   | L.-Cpl.         | Coltart, John S.
  15912   | Pte.            | Hutchison, James.
  15913   | Pte.            | Annand, James S.
  15914   | L.-Cpl.         | M'Kenzie, Hugh F.
  15915   | Pte.            | Guthrie, William.
  15916   | Cpl.            | Steven, Alex.
  15917   | Pte.            | Hoole, Roland Allan.
  15918   | Pte.            | Duff, Robert.
  15919   | Pte.            | M'Lean, Alex.
  15920   | Pte.            | Paterson, J.
  15921   | Pte.            | Maxwell, Herbert S.
  15922   | Pte.            | Simpson, A.D.H.
  15923   | Pte.            | MacFarlane, N.
  15924   | Pte.            | Casey, George H.
  15925   | Pte.            | Baillies, Oswald.
  15926   | Pte.            | Nowery, Alex. F.
  15927   | L.-Cpl.         | Thomson, Alex. D.
  15928   | Cpl.            | Brackenridge, John.
  15929   | Pte.            | Hutchison, Alfred.
  15930   | L.-Cpl.         | Kunzle, Paul.
  15931   | L.-Cpl.         | Nisbet, John D.
  15932   | Pte.            | Taylor, Thomas T.
  15933   | Pte.            | Long, Cunningham.
  15934   | Pte.            | Wark, John.
  15935   | L.-Cpl.         | Kerr, Robert.
  15936   | Pte.            | Aitken, Wilfred.
  15937   | Cpl.            | Farnell, Fred.
  15938   | Sergt.          | Watson, Alex. G.
  15939   | Pte.            | M'Lean, A.
  15940   | L.-Cpl.         | Yuill, Andrew.
  15941   | Pte.            | M'Culloch, Charles M.
  15942   | A/C.S.M.        | Lochhead, Alex. W.
  15943   | Pte.            | Glen, James.
  15944   | Pte.            | Yates, Norman.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  15945   | Cpl.            | McNaught, John.
  15946   | Pte.            | Whyte, Duncan.
  15947   | L.-Cpl.         | Robertson, John.
  15948   | Sergt.          | M'Call, William.
  15949   | Pte.            | Vallance, Harold L.
  15950   | Pte.            | Gray, James.
  15951   | Sergt.          | Howard, John B.S.
  15952   | Pte.            | Anderson, John William.
  15953   | Pte.            | Brodie, Alex.
  15954   | Sergt.          | Headrick, William Smith.
  15955   | A/C.S.M.        | Tilley, Richard.
  15956   | Sergt.          | Stewart, William S.
  15957   | Sergt.          | Parker, James R.
  15958   | Pte.            | Maconochie, William K.
  15959   | Sergt.          | Ritchie, William F.
  15960   | Pte.            | Kyle, John.
  15961   | L.-Sergt.       | Hughes, Arthur.
  15962   | Pte.            | Farish, Samuel.
  15963   | Pte.            | Ritchie, Robert.
  15964   | L.-Sergt.       | Osborne, John.
  15965   | Pte.            | Kerr, John.
  15966   | Pte.            | Gemmell, Norman L.
  15967   | Pte.            | Grant, Alex. A.
  15968   | Pte.            | Inglis, John James.
  15969   | L.-Cpl.         | Turner, Elliot D.
  15970   | L.-Cpl.         | Cunningham, Peter N.
  15971   | Pte.            | Gilchrist, Thomas A.
  15972   | Sergt.          | Wilson, A.P.
  15973   | L.-Cpl.         | Dickson, William.
  15974   | Pte.            | Orchardson, Archibald.
  15975   | L.-Cpl.         | Watson, Andrew.
  15976   | Pte.            | Thorburn, James.
  15977   | Pte.            | Sharp, Alex. Thomas.
  15978   | Pte.            | Hastings, Edward H.
  15979   | L.-Cpl.         | Arthur, Charles F.
  15980   | Pte.            | M'Ilwraith, James.
  15981   | L.-Sergt.       | Pooley, R.S.
  15982   | Pte.            | Campbell, Samuel.
  15983   | Pte.            | M'Allan, John T.
  15984   | Sergt.          | Lugton, G.D.
  15985   | Pte.            | M'Walter, Thomas Scott.
  15986   | Pte.            | Wood, John.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  15987   | L.-Cpl.         | Mackie, William R.N.
  15988   | Pte.            | Pooley, Francis H.
  15989   | Sig.-Sergt.     | Marshall, John H.
  15990   | Pte.            | Pollock, James Watson.
  15991   | Pte.            | MacKinnon, Robert A.
  15992   | Pte.            | Reid, James William M.
  15993   | Pte.            | Scott, James.
  15994   | Pte.            | M'Veigh, Hugh.
  15095   | Pte.            | Gregor, William.
  15996   | Pte.            | Salmine, John.
  15997   | Pte.            | Forsyth, Stewart.
  15998   | Cpl.            | Walker, Robert.
  15999   | Pte.            | M'Kenzie, John M.
  16000   | Pte.            | Crosbie, Robert.
  16001   | Pte.            | Boyd, William.
  16002   | Pte.            | Main, John.
  16003   | Pte.            | Cattell, Joseph.
  16004   | Pte.            | Deans, John K.
  16005   | Pte.            | Watt, Thomas S.
  16006   | Pte.            | Kerr, John.
  16007   | Pte.            | M'Lean, Norman.
  16008   | Pte.            | Wood, David S.
  16009   | L.-Cpl.         | Main, Samuel Hope.
  16010   | Pte.            | M'Lintock, William.
  16011   | Cpl.            | Brodie, James L.
  16012   | Pte.            | Mason, George Bishop.
  16013   | Pte.            | Mullan, William John
  16014   | Pte.            | M'Donald, Robert Barr.
  16015   | L.-Cpl.         | Turnbull, David.
  16016   | Pte.            | Abrahamson, A.
  16017   | Pte.            | Brownlee, George.
  16018   | Pte.            | Hood, Robert.
  16019   | Sergt.          | Wattie, Alex.
  16020   | Sergt.          | Lee, Edward.
  16021   | Pte.            | Kirk, Robert.
  16022   | Pte.            | Cassels, Hugh L.
  16023   | Pte.            | Maclagan, Douglas.
  16024   | L.-Cpl.         | M'Allister, John.
  16025   | L.-Cpl.         | Longmuir, Robert.
  16026   | Pte.            | Keir, John A.L.
  16027   | Pte.            | Blair, Fred.
  16028   | Pte.            | Gemmell, Alex.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  16029   | Pte.            | Nixon, David.
  16030   | Pte.            | Ritchie, William.
  16031   | Pte.            | Dick, Andrew.
  16032   | Pte.            | Kinnear, Ian F.G.
  16033   | Pte.            | Morton, Alfred.
  16034   | L.-Cpl.         | Paton, John.
  16035   | Pte.            | Tait, William.
  16036   | Pte.            | Ferguson, James.
  16037   | Pte.            | Miller, Thomas.
  16038   | Pte.            | Friend, Joseph.
  16039   | Pte.            | Muirhead, John.
  16040   | Pte.            | Young, George Graham.
  16041   | Pte.            | Langlands, John F.
  16042   | Pte.            | Lovat, M.
  16043   | Cpl.            | Smith, A.W.
  16044   | Pte.            | Harvey, Kenneth R.
  16045   | Pte.            | Boyd, William.
  16046   | Pte.            | Boyd, John.
  16047   | Pte.            | Ramsay, George.
  16048   | Pte.            | Morton, Thomas.
  16049   | Pte.            | Johnston, James K.
  16050   | L.-Cpl.         | Pickles, Frank.
  16051   | Pte.            | Jackson, James.
  16052   | Pte.            | Dalziel, William.
  16053   | Cpl.            | Todd, James C.
  16054   | Pte.            | Millar, John.
  16055   | Pte.            | Cunningham, John.
  16056   | L.-Cpl.         | Drennan, Andrew Adam.
  16057   | Pte.            | Thomson, James M'K.
  16058   | Sergt.          | Paterson, Walter A.
  16059   | Pte.            | Ness, George.
  16060   | Pte.            | Barrett, F.G.
  16061   | Pte.            | Spiers, Alex. R.
  16062   | Pte.            | Tait, William.
  16063   | Pte.            | Anderson, Charles.
  16064   | Pte.            | Hutton, James.
  16065   | Pte.            | McLaughlin, William.
  16066   | Pte.            | Higgins, Robert K.
  16067   | Pte.            | M'Kenzie, Duncan M'R.
  16068   | Pte.            | M'Lellan, John.
  16069   | Pte.            | M'Rorie, William D.
  16070   | Pte.            | Dickson, William.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  16071   | Pte.            | Miller, James.
  16072   | L.-Cpl.         | Martin, George F.
  16073   | Pte.            | Gardiner, Alex.
  16074   | Pte.            | White, William Thomson.
  16075   | Pte.            | Wood, Joe.
  16076   | Pte.            | Wallace, Thomas.
  16077   | Pte.            | M'Kenzie, Thomas D.
  16078   | Pte.            | Adam, Andrew Ralston.
  16079   | Pte.            | Kelly, James H.
  16080   | Pte.            | Dunsmore, Thomas S.
  16081   | Pte.            | Cameron, Arthur.
  16082   | Pte.            | Lavelle, James.
  16083   | Pte.            | Martin, Hugh Albert.
  16084   | Sergt.          | Gilbert, Young.
  16085   | Pte.            | Parker, William.
  16086   | Pte.            | M'Ewan, Thomas W.
  16087   | Pte.            | Fraser, William.
  16088   | Pte.            | Rae, David.
  16089   | Pte.            | Reid, David Boyd.
  16090   | Pte.            | Scott, Alex.
  16091   | Pte.            | Watt, William.
  16092   | Pte.            | Hutchison, William.
  16093   | Cpl.            | Thomson, William.
  16094   | Pte.            | Findlay, John Walter.
  16095   | Pte.            | Ross, John M.
  16096   | Pte.            | Wright, William.
  16097   | Pte.            | Allan, James.
  16098   | Pte.            | Relton, Arthur N.
  16099   | Pte.            | Adamson, Joseph.
  16100   | Cpl.            | Dickson, John.
  16101   | Pte.            | Clark, G. M'I.
  16102   | Pte.            | Struthers, William.
  16103   | Pte.            | Campbell, Stuart.
  16104   | Pte.            | Cruickshank, J.C.
  16105   | Pte.            | Johnstone, George.
  16106   | Pte.            | Williamson, Andrew.
  16107   | Pte.            | M'Intyre, James.
  16108   | Pte.            | Grindlay, Charles Percy.
  16109   | Pte.            | Wallace, William.
  16110   | Pte.            | Boyd, John Shaw.
  16111   | Pte.            | Campbell, John.
  16112   | Pte.            | Mathieson, Stanley.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  16113   | Pte.            | M'Pherson, George L.
  16114   | Pte.            | Kennedy, David.
  16115   | Pte.            | Robertson, H.
  16116   | Pte.            | Grierson, William Ian.
  16117   | Pte.            | Rooney, Alex.
  16118   | Pte.            | Fairfax, G.A.F.
  16119   | Pte.            | Chalmers, Thomas.
  16120   | Pte.            | Maxwell, Robert.
  16121   | Pte.            | Beveridge, Erskine W.
  16122   | Pte.            | Napier, John.
  16123   | Sergt.          | Johnstone, S.
  16124   | Pte.            | Kilcullen, Thomas.
  16125   | Pte.            | Muil, Frank.
  16126   | Pte.            | Napier, William.
  16127   | Pte.            | M'Master, Alex.
  16128   | Pte.            | Gibson, Thomas Bell.
  16129   | Pte.            | Gregory, William.
  16130   | Pte.            | Brunsdon, Henry George.
  16131   | Pte.            | M'Gartland, Patrick.
  16132   | Sergt.          | Beck, Andrew.
  16133   | Pte.            | Tod, Frederick M.C.
  16134   | Pte.            | Dunlop, William.
  16135   | Pte.            | Kelly, Charles.
  16136   | Pte.            | Kennedy, John.
  16137   | Pte.            | Nicoll, George L.
  16138   | Pte.            | Toole, James L.
  16139   | L.-Sergt.       | Watson, Peter D.
  16140   | Pte.            | M'Intyre, Archibald.
  16141   | Pte.            | Graham, A.W.B.
  16142   | Pte.            | Stubbs, James F.
  16143   | Pte.            | Niven, John L.L.
  16144   | Pte.            | Simpson, Donald.
  16145   | Pte.            | M'Innes, Archibald C.
  16146   | Pte.            | Milligan, Robert.
  16147   | Pte.            | Williamson, Charles.
  16148   | Pte.            | Mackay, Angus.
  16149   | L.-Cpl.         | Thorburn, Henry.
  16150   | Pte.            | Morrison, Charles H.
  16151   | Pte.            | Archibald, Andrew.
  16152   | Pte.            | Campbell, Andrew.
  16153   | Pte.            | Morgan, John S.
  16154   | Pte.            | Grassick, Henry J.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  16155   | Pte.            | Campbell, William.
  16156   | L.-Cpl.         | M'Callum, Herbert L.
  16157   | Pte.            | Ewing, John.
  16158   | Pte.            | M'Lean, Angus.
  16159   | Pte.            | Graham, W.F.
  16160   | Pte.            | Hamilton, J.
  16161   | Pte.            | Black, David S.
  16162   | Pte.            | Cousland, Archibald.
  16163   | Pte.            | Dunlop, Colin B.
  16164   | Pte.            | Drew, George Millar.
  16165   | Pte.            | Fotheringham, James R.
  16166   | Pte.            | Kerr, John Galloway.
  16167   | Pte.            | Oswald, Robert R.
  16168   | L.-Cpl.         | Racionzer, J.L.
  16169   | Pte.            | Sinclair, John F.
  16170   | Pte.            | Black, Thomas.
  16171   | Pte.            | Paterson, David.
  16172   | Pte.            | Wilson, W.R.
  16173   | Pte.            | Kay, James J.
  16174   | L.-Cpl.         | Munro, Ronald.
  16175   | Pte.            | Liston, John.
  16176   | Pte.            | Paton, Robert.
  16177   | L.-Cpl.         | Spence, John George.
  16178   | Pte.            | Thomson, Ernest.
  16179   | Cpl.            | Barrie, Alex.
  16180   | Pte.            | Aitken, Robert.
  16181   | Pte.            | Dewar, J.F.
  16182   | Pte.            | Henderson, Hugh.
  16183   | Pte.            | Lane, Andrew.
  16184   | Pte.            | M'Dougall, David.
  16185   | Pte.            | Deacon, R.E.
  16186   | Pte.            | Stroud, Archibald William.
  16187   | Pte.            | Brown, Archibald.
  16188   | Pte.            | Manson, William.
  16189   | L.-Sergt.       | Robertson, Alexander Y.
  16190   | Pte.            | Gauld, Andrew.
  16191   | Pte.            | Imrie, William.
  16192   | Pte.            | M'Killop, Hugh.
  16193   | Pte.            | Porter, John.
  16194   | Pte.            | Sanderson, John T.
  16195   | Cpl.            | Andrews, John.
  16196   | Pte.            | Smith, James.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  16197   | Pte.            | Waters, Robert R.
  16198   | Pte.            | Watson, William.
  16199   | Pte.            | Davies, Howard L.
  16200   | Pte.            | Thomson, George.
  16201   | L.-Cpl.         | Whiteford, Thomas R.
  16202   | Pte.            | Aitken, Thomas.
  16203   | Pte.            | Wood, Alex.
  16204   | L.-Cpl.         | Law, Robert.
  16205   | Pte.            | Thomson, John.
  16206   | Pte.            | Park, R.
  16207   | Pte.            | Ferguson, Robert.
  16208   | Pte.            | Hutcheson, William J.F.
  16209   | Pte.            | Gardner, H.A.
  16210   | Pte.            | Robertson, W.B.
  16211   | Pte.            | Walker, Arthur P.
  16212   | Pte.            | Miller, Alex. S.
  16213   | Pte.            | Scott, Charles R.G.
  16214   | L.-Cpl.         | Kemp, Archibald J.
  16215   | Pte.            | Ewing, George H.
  16216   | Pte.            | Harper, Alex. C.
  16217   | Pte.            | Henderson, James.
  16218   | Pte.            | Hill, Archibald.
  16219   | Pte.            | Dempster, G.C.
  16220   | Pte.            | Taylor, Matthew.
  16221   | Pte.            | Adam, John L.
  16222   | Pte.            | Biggart, John.
  16223   | Pte.            | M'Leod, Angus.
  16224   | Pte.            | Reid, Archibald M.
  16225   | Pte.            | Allan, Hugh Robert.
  16226   | Pte.            | Crowley, John.
  16227   | Pte.            | Hawthorn, Charles.
  16228   | Pte.            | Miller, William.
  16229   | Pte.            | Herring, Frank M.
  16230   | L.-Cpl.         | Barrie, George Alston.
  16231   | Pte.            | Struth, James S.
  16232   | Pte.            | Ward, William Allan.
  16233   | Pte.            | Ross, David.
  16234   | Pte.            | Walker, Roderick.
  16235   | Pte.            | Carmichael, Duncan.
  16236   | Pte.            | Hamilton, Arthur.
  16237   | Pte.            | Dodds, James.
  16238   | Pte.            | M'Millan, John A.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  16239   | Pte.            | Fearby, John E.
  16240   | L.-Cpl.         | Okell, Cyril.
  16241   | Pte.            | Mathieson, Alex.
  16242   | Pte.            | M'Ewan, Malcolm W.
  16243   | L.-Cpl.         | Mair, William Craig.
  16244   | L.-Cpl.         | Macdonald, John.
  16245   | Pte.            | Dickie, William.
  16246   | Pte.            | Hyslop, John.
  16247   | Pte.            | Miller, Kenneth S.
  16248   | Pte.            | Laing, John.
  16249   | Pte.            | Watt, Edwin.
  16250   | Pte.            | Levey, Jack.
  16251   | Pte.            | Carmichael, Archibald.
  16252   | Pte.            | Cree, Walter Hill.
  16253   | Pte.            | Bennett, David.
  16254   | Pte.            | Coats, Thomas.
  16255   | Pte.            | Thomson, Robert W.
  16256   | Pte.            | Mitchell, C.H.
  16257   | Pte.            | Powell, James E.L.
  16258   | Pte.            | Andrew, John.
  16259   | Pte.            | Mowat, Alex.
  16260   | Pte.            | Gardner, James.
  16261   | Pte.            | Thistle, Robert James.
  16262   | Pte.            | Macaulay, William.
  16263   | Pte.            | Gemmell, Allan.
  16264   | Pte.            | Miller, John F.
  16265   | L.-Cpl.         | Hall, Robert.
  16266   | Pte.            | M'Queen, John Duff.
  16267   | Pte.            | Aird, Allan Muir.
  16268   | Pte.            | Hayes, John T.
  16269   | Pte.            | Stewart, C. Campbell.
  16270   | Pte.            | Campbell, Jack M'N.
  16271   | Pte.            | M'Nair, Thomas.
  16272   | Pte.            | Chisholm, Alex.
  16273   | Pte.            | Robertson, William P.
  16274   | L.-Cpl.         | Anderson, John S.
  16275   | Pte.            | Russell, Hugh Ramsay.
  16276   | Pte.            | Carmichael, Hugh H.
  16277   | L.-Cpl.         | Neary, Thomas.
  16278   | Pte.            | Thomson, Adam John.
  16279   | Pte.            | King, John W.
  16280   | Pte.            | Neilson, George.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  16281   | Pte.            | Simpson, John
  16282   | Pte.            | Barbour, James.
  16283   | Pte.            | Anderson, John.
  16284   | Pte.            | Peters, David.
  16285   | Pte.            | Jamieson, George William.
  16286   | Pte.            | Wilson, Thomas.
  16287   | Pte.            | Morrison, Adam C.
  16288   | Pte.            | Kerr, John.
  16289   | Pte.            | Anderson, James.
  16290   | Pte.            | Wilson, John.
  16291   | Pte.            | Laird, William.
  16292   | Pte.            | Parker, William.
  16293   | Pte.            | Murray, William.
  16294   | Pte.            | Andrew, Donald.
  16295   | Pte.            | Glover, Victor.
  16296   | Pte.            | Armour, Andrew.
  16297   | Pte.            | M'Dowell, John.
  16298   | Pte.            | Caldwell, Richard T.
  16299   | Pte.            | Smith, William.
   2684   | Pte.            | Simpson, George P.
   2685   | Pte.            | Robertson, David M.
   2686   | Pte.            | Harris, Ernest.
   2687   | Pte.            | Burleigh, F.S.
   2688   | Pte.            | Watson, Joseph.
   2689   | Pte.            | Sinclair, George.
   2690   | Pte.            | Watson, Stanley M.W.
   2691   | Pte.            | Miller, James.
   2692   | Pte.            | Nicol, William Kerr.
   2693   | Pte.            | King, William.
   2694   | Pte.            | M'Culloch, Walter.
   2695   | Pte.            | Park, Matthew.
   2696   | Pte.            | Murdoch, James.
   2697   | Pte.            | Laverty, Henry.
   2698   | Pte.            | Jordan, Harold W.
   2699   | Pte.            | Johnston, James
   2700   | Pte.            | Swan, James.
   2701   | Pte.            | Colvil, Harold C.
   2702   | Pte.            | Hendry, H.G.
   2703   | Pte.            | Heaverman, Walter E.
   2704   | Pte.            | Yates, Robert.
   2705   | Pte.            | Whytock, James.
   2706   | L.-Cpl.         | M'Munn, James.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
   2707   | Pte.            | M'Knight, James.
   2708   | Pte.            | Carswell, James.
   2709   | Pte.            | Sinclair, George.
   2710   | Pte.            | Taylor, Hugh B.
   2711   | Pte.            | Bennet, James.
   2712   | Pte.            | Laing, Robert M'L.
   2713   | Pte.            | Johnston, William E.
   2714   | L.-Cpl.         | Gilchrist, James.
   2715   | Pte.            | Scott, H. Fred.
   2716   | Pte.            | Neish, Alexander M.
   2717   | Pte.            | Robertson, James C.
   2718   | Pte.            | Gilmour, Murray.
   2719   | Pte.            | M'Innes, Duncan.
   2720   | Pte.            | M'Kinnon, Robert B.
   2721   | L.-Cpl.         | Craig, Robert.
   2722   | Pte.            | Hutton, George L.
   2723   | Pte.            | Montgomery, Andrew D.
   2724   | Pte.            | Killin, William.
   2725   | Pte.            | Ramage, John.
   2726   | L.-Cpl.         | Henderson, James G.
   2727   | Pte.            | Glennie, William.
   2728   | Pte.            | Mackie, John B.
   2729   | Pte.            | Gemmell, Charles S.
   2730   | Pte.            | Herbert, Robert.
   2731   | Pte.            | Niven, A.C.L.
   2732   | Pte.            | Brown, A.G.
   2733   | Pte.            | Paterson, William.
   2734   | Pte.            | Young, James.
   2735   | Pte.            | Young, Robert.
   2736   | Pte.            | Scott, Robert.
   2737   | Pte.            | Stewart, Daniel.
   2738   | Pte.            | Preston, James.
   2739   | L.-Cpl.         | Lindsay, Matthew.
   2740   | Pte.            | Finlay, James G.
   2741   | Pte.            | Mitchell, Robert C.
   2742   | Pte.            | Taylor, John.
   2743   | Pte.            | M'Ilvaney, James.
   2744   | Pte.            | Hunter, John C.
   2745   | Pte.            | Grant, Douglas.
   2746   | Pte.            | Smith, D.F.
   2749   | Pte.            | Fulton, Archibald H.
   2750   | Pte.            | Garner, Robt. K.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
   2751   | Pte.            | Grant, Alastair M.
   2752   | Pte.            | Howieson, Peter.
   2753   | Pte.            | Kidd, Thomas B.
   2754   | Pte.            | Lochhead, James.
   2755   | Pte.            | Ovenstone, James.
   2756   | Pte.            | Owen, George.
   2757   | Pte.            | Russell, George.
   2758   | C.Q.M.S.        | Scott, William.
   2759   | Pte.            | Smith, Ernest M.
   2760   | Pte.            | Wright, John.
   2761   | Pte.            | Jaffrey, William.
   2762   | Pte.            | Hardie, John.
   2763   | Pte.            | Tennant, Archibald A.
   2764   | Pte.            | O'Beirne, Thomas.
   2765   | Pte.            | Wilkie, Robert James D.
   2766   | Pte.            | Goodfellow, James.
   2767   | Pte.            | Bain, Bruce.
   2768   | Pte.            | Blakely, John.
   2769   | Pte.            | Millar, H.S.M.
   2770   | Pte.            | Wright, William.
   2771   | Pte.            | Waddell, John.
   2772   | Pte.            | Gemmell, Hugh K.
   2773   | Pte.            | M'Creath, David.
   2774   | Pte.            | Forsyth, George S.
   2775   | Pte.            | Stewart, Donald.
   2776   | Pte.            | Mackie, James.
   2777   | Pte.            | Hamilton, Andrew.
   2778   | Pte.            | M'Farlane, William.
   2779   | Pte.            | Currie, James.
   2780   | Pte.            | Craig, Thomas L.M.
   2781   | Pte.            | M'Nidder, Alex. M.
   2782   | Pte.            | Ward, James M.
   2783   | Pte.            | Hamilton, James M.
   2784   | Pte.            | Ross, Alex. M'K.
   2785   | Pte.            | Murphy, Albert E.
   2786   | Pte.            | Clark, John.
   2787   | Pte.            | Sanderson, Thomas.
   2788   | Pte.            | Grierson, William.
   2789   | Pte.            | Crawford, David.
   2790   | Pte.            | Smith, Hugh M'F.
   2791   | Pte.            | Askham, S.G.
   2792   | Pte.            | Stevenson, John.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
   2793   | Pte.            | Pettigrew, William.
   2794   | Pte.            | Pettigrew, Thomas T.
   2795   | Pte.            | Yuill, William T.L.
   2796   | Pte.            | Muir, James Craig.
   2797   | Pte.            | Leiper, Frank.
   2798   | Pte.            | Liddell, Robert.
   2799   | Pte.            | Allwart, John Charles.
   2800   | Pte.            | Gilhooly, Michael.
   2801   | Pte.            | M'Donald, James.
   2802   | Pte.            | Rose, Arthur O.
   2803   | Pte.            | Stevenson, Colin Campbell.
   2804   | Pte.            | M'Farlane, William C.
   2805   | Pte.            | M'Williams, Bertram.
   2806   | Pte.            | Cameron, William S.
   2807   | Pte.            | Dale, Robert.
   2808   | Pte.            | Irving, Charles.
   2809   | Pte.            | Blythe, Roland F.
   2810   | Pte.            | Shearer, R.W.
   2811   | Pte.            | Holmes, W.
   2812   | Pte.            | Bryson, Matthew.
   2813   | Pte.            | Taylor, Archibald A.
   2814   | Pte.            | Gray, Edwin.
   2815   | Pte.            | Bryden, David.
   2816   | Pte.            | Stevenson, John.
   2817   | Pte.            | Catchpool, Albert.
   2818   | Pte.            | Baird, Arthur J.
   2819   | Pte.            | M'Kechnie, John.
   2820   | Pte.            | Napier, Claud H.
   2821   | Pte.            | M'Lachlan, Fred. E.
   2822   | Pte.            | Harris, John L.H.
   2823   | Pte.            | Adams, Andrew.
   2824   | Pte.            | Torrance, James.
   2825   | Pte.            | Murray, Edward.
   2826   | Pte.            | Bain, Charles.
   2827   | Pte.            | Hourston, David William.
   2828   | Pte.            | Lee, George.
   2829   | Pte.            | Mackenzie, James E.
   2830   | Pte.            | Stoddart, Adam.
   2831   | Pte.            | M'Callum, James.
   2832   | Pte.            | Wylie, William.
   2833   | Pte.            | Watson, James F.
   2834   | Pte.            | M'Phee, James.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
   2835   | Pte.            | Kennedy, James D.
   2836   | Pte.            | Davidson, Charles.
   2837   | Pte.            | Hogg, H.
   2838   | Pte.            | Robb, William.
   2839   | Pte.            | Ferguson, George S.
   2840   | Pte.            | M'Intyre, James L.
   2841   | Pte.            | Morrison, John.
   2842   | Pte.            | M'Vicar, Alex.
   2843   | Pte.            | Jack, James L.
   2844   | Pte.            | Adams, George Ross.
   2845   | Pte.            | Wilson, Frank.
   2846   | Pte.            | Broadfoot, J.R.
   2847   | Pte.            | Miller, James.
   2848   | Pte.            | Murdoch, Henry.
   2849   | Pte.            | MacWilliams, James.
   2850   | Pte.            | Wilkie, A.K.
   2851   | Pte.            | Falconer, John.
   2852   | Pte.            | M'Murdo, Jack.
   2853   | Pte.            | Ramsay, Robert B.
   2854   | Pte.            | Copland, Lawrence.
   2855   | Pte.            | Monoghan, William.
   2856   | Pte.            | Reid, John H.
   2857   | Pte.            | Cowie, Robert.
   2858   | Pte.            | Halloran, William.
   2859   | Pte.            | Clark, Noel M.
   2860   | Pte.            | M'Kinlay, William.
   2861   | Pte.            | M'Intyre, Hugh.
   2862   | Pte.            | Howie, John Brown.
   2863   | Pte.            | Coupar, Arthur.
   2864   | Pte.            | Wilson, Thomas Jackson.
   2865   | Pte.            | Kerr, John Rennie.
   2866   | Pte.            | Sleater, William.
   2867   | Pte.            | Morton, John Craig.
   2868   | Pte.            | Constable, James.
   2869   | Pte.            | Melville, William.
   2870   | Pte.            | Oliver, John.
   2871   | Pte.            | Dunlop, Richard O.G.
   2872   | Pte.            | M'Jannet, John C.
   2873   | Pte.            | Hervey, Robert.
   2874   | Pte.            | Tindal, David.
   2875   | Pte.            | Wileman, Robert.
   2876   | Pte.            | Hamilton, James I.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
   2877   | Pte.            | Watson, Duncan Roy.
   2878   | Pte.            | Nicol, Thomas.
   2879   | Pte.            | Hastings, S.
   2880   | Pte.            | Smith, G.M.
   2881   | Pte.            | Sloan, D.
   2882   | Pte.            | Farquhar, John F.
   2883   | Pte.            | Paterson, Charles.
   2884   | Pte.            | Wilson, James.
   2885   | Pte.            | Garrioch, Robert.
   2886   | Pte.            | Wooley, Archibald K.
   2887   | Pte.            | Black, James M'K.
   2888   | Pte.            | Ingram, James.
   2889   | Pte.            | Craig, George.
   2890   | Pte.            | Cunningham, Andrew.
   2891   | Pte.            | Cameron, Lachlan A.
   2892   | Pte.            | Gillies, Henry.
   2893   | Pte.            | Peacock, David Kerr.
   2894   | Pte.            | M'Donald, Robert.
   2895   | Pte.            | Henderson, George.
   2896   | L.-Cpl.         | Scott, James.
   2897   | Pte.            | Dinwoodie, William.
   2898   | Pte.            | Birrell, Robert.
   2899   | Pte.            | M'Kerrow, G.
   2900   | Pte.            | Miller, John G.
   2901   | Pte.            | Foote, George Alex.
   2902   | Pte.            | Stewart, Thomas.
   2903   | Pte.            | Murray, John K.
   2904   | Pte.            | Steele, George James.
   2905   | Pte.            | Dietrich, William J.L.
   2906   | Pte.            | Miller, Duncan.
   2907   | Pte.            | Ramsay, John.
   2908   | Pte.            | Struthers, David W.
   2909   | Pte.            | Conway, Frank Joseph.
   2910   | Pte.            | Lang, Archibald.
   2911   | Pte.            | Watson, Donald Grassick.
   2912   | Pte.            | Evans, Joseph Howard.
   2913   | Pte.            | Burt, Henry.
   2914   | Pte.            | Dykes, James A.
   2915   | Pte.            | Kirkwood, Alexander.
   2916   | Pte.            | Young, John Douglas.
   2917   | Pte.            | Calder, James Barclay.
   2918   | Pte.            | Orr, William.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
   2919   | Pte.            | Park, Thomas W.U.
   2920   | Pte.            | Bennie, Hugh O.
   2921   | Pte.            | Allan, William.
   2922   | Pte.            | Haft, Saul.
   2923   | Pte.            | Rosenbloom, Harry.
   2924   | Pte.            | Brown, William Robert.
   2925   | Pte.            | Linton, William F.
   2926   | Pte.            | Burns, Robert.
   2927   | Pte.            | Munn, Douglas.
   2928   | Pte.            | Macpherson, Donald B.
   2929   | Pte.            | M'Gugan, John.
   2930   | Pte.            | M'Innes, James.
   2931   | Pte.            | Colliston, James.
   2932   | Pte.            | Alston, Thomas.
   2933   | Pte.            | Adam, William.
   2934   | Pte.            | Green, Alfred.
   2935   | Pte.            | Lauder, Alex. Duncan.
   2936   | Pte.            | Angus, Thomas.
   2937   | Pte.            | Dewar, Robert Nisbet.
   2938   | Pte.            | M'Lean, Murdoch.
   2939   | Pte.            | Preston, James D.
   2940   | Pte.            | Young, George.
   2941   | Pte.            | Sherry, John.
   2942   | Pte.            | Bryce, Allan.
   2943   | Pte.            | M'Millan, John R.
   2944   | Pte.            | Robertson, John.
   2945   | Pte.            | Graham, James.
   2946   | Pte.            | Neasham, Robert.
   2947   | Pte.            | Shaw, James.
   2948   | Pte.            | M'Donald, Alex.
   2949   | Pte.            | M'Naught, Alex.
   2950   | Pte.            | Cross, Robert M'K.
   2951   | Pte.            | Doig, Thomas F.
   2952   | Pte.            | Howie, John.
   2953   | Pte.            | M'Kenzie, Duncan William.
   2954   | Pte.            | Stephenson, Fred.
   2955   | Pte.            | Barker, George Charles.
   2956   | Pte.            | Garvie, Ernest L.
   2957   | Pte.            | Hutchison, E. Deans.
   2958   | Pte.            | Harrower, Alex.
   2959   | Pte.            | Baird, James H.H.
   2960   | Pte.            | Ross, Thomas.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
   2961   | Pte.            | Watson, Thomas H.
   2962   | Pte.            | Skinner, John.
   2963   | Pte.            | Begg, Robert Craig.
   2964   | Pte.            | Buchan, Bertram Gray.
   2965   | Pte.            | Carlson, Edward P.
   2966   | Pte.            | Hastie, Robert L.
   2967   | Pte.            | Fulton, Matthews.
   2968   | Pte.            | Watson, T. Greig.
   2969   | Pte.            | Allan, Joseph D.
   2970   | Pte.            | Miller, John.
   2971   | Pte.            | Kerr, Donald.
   2972   | Pte.            | Barr, Matthew.
   2973   | Pte.            | Thompson, Alfred W.
   2974   | Pte.            | Gibson, Arthur Charles.
   2975   | Pte.            | Sorrie, George.
   2976   | Pte.            | Hamilton, Charles.
   2977   | Pte.            | Gauld, Hector L.
   2978   | Pte.            | Holmes, James Y.
   2979   | Pte.            | Winning, Isaac.
   2980   | Pte.            | Raffles, Alex.
   2981   | Pte.            | Thomson, Thomas Craig.
   2982   | Pte.            | Boyle, John.
   2983   | Pte.            | M'Naught, William.
   2984   | Pte.            | Scott, Thomas H.C.
   2985   | Pte.            | Garmory, Thomas.
   2986   | Pte.            | Mitchell, John.
   2987   | Pte.            | Scott, Thomas.
   2988   | Pte.            | Brown, Thomas Montgomery.
   2989   | Pte.            | Fleming, Alex.
   2990   | Pte.            | Fawcett, Cyril John.
   2991   | Pte.            | Grant, William N.
   2992   | Pte.            | Irving, Alex.
   2993   | Pte.            | M'Greehin, Frederick J.
   2994   | Pte.            | Sawers, William Brown.
   2995   | Pte.            | Ireland, William B.B.
   2996   | Pte.            | Dow, Hugh Auskin.
   2997   | Pte.            | Connar, Norman.
   2998   | Pte.            | Baxter, William.
  23001   | Pte.            | Baxter, Thomas.
  23002   | Pte.            | Morton, George.
  23003   | Pte.            | Bruce, William C.
  23004   | Pte.            | Banks, William Stephen.

==========+=================+===============================
 Reg. No. |    Rank.        |           Name.
----------+-----------------+-------------------------------
  23005   | Pte.            | Peat, Harold Ross.
  23006   | Pte.            | M'Queen, James.
  23007   | Pte.            | Black, Max.
  23008   | Pte.            | Robertson, James.
  23009   | Pte.            | Campbell, Roland.
  23010   | Pte.            | Bell, James.
  23011   | Pte.            | Drummond, Alex. G.
  23012   | Pte.            | Kerr, William.
  23013   | Pte.            | M'Clymont, Robert.
  23014   | Pte.            | Brown, Hector M'D.
  23015   | Pte.            | Meadows, Bentley.
  23016   | Pte.            | Train, Thomas.
  23017   | Pte.            | Sutherland, Daniel.
  23018   | Pte.            | Watt, John.
  23019   | Pte.            | Halliday, William.
  23020   | Pte.            | M'Cormack, John Jeffrey.
  23021   | Pte.            | Gray, John.
  23022   | Pte.            | Dickson, John.
  23023   | Pte.            | Anderson, William S.
  23024   | Pte.            | M'Gowan, Archibald James.
  23025   | Pte.            | Farquhar, Henry Steven.
  23026   | Pte.            | Somerville, Peter.
  23027   | Pte.            | MacIntyre, William M.
  23028   | Pte.            | Spence, Ernest Alex.
  23029   | Pte.            | Ross, E.N.
  23030   | Pte.            | Drummond, J.
  23031   | Pte.            | Dick, James.
  23032   | Pte.            | Ogilvie, James.
  23033   | Pte.            | Johnston, John.
  23034   | Pte.            | Monteath, William.
  23035   | Pte.            | Kirkhope, James B.

       *       *       *       *       *

    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Typographical errors corrected in text:                   |
    |                                                           |
    | Page  60: Villers-Brettoneux replaced with                |
    |           Villers-Bretonneux                              |
    | Page  74: ryhthmical replaced with rhythmical             |
    | Page  93: Drsydale replaces with Drysdale                 |
    | Page  95: 15937 L.-Sergt. W. Dickson corrected to         |
    |           15973 L.-Sergt. W. Dickson                      |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Seventeenth Highland Light
Infantry (Glasgow Chamber of Commerce Battalion), by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SEVENTEENTH HIGHLAND ***

***** This file should be named 20136.txt or 20136.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/1/3/20136/

Produced by Robert Cicconetti, Jeannie Howse and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
