The Project Gutenberg EBook of American Missionary - Volume 50, No. 2,
February, 1896, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: American Missionary - Volume 50, No. 2, February, 1896

Author: Various

Release Date: May 24, 2007 [EBook #21595]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AMERICAN MISSIONARY ***




Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Karen Dalrymple, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by Cornell University Digital Collections)






The American Missionary

FEBRUARY, 1896

VOL. L

No. 2




CONTENTS


EDITORIAL.

  THE OUTLOOK,                                                 33

  LINCOLN MEMORIAL DAY,                                        34

  PAT'S MISS'N BOX (WITH PICTURE),                             35

  THE PROBLEM OF ILLITERACY,                                   36

  FIELD WORKERS,                                               37

  ABRAHAM LINCOLN CENT SOCIETY,                                38

LIST OF OUR FIELD WORKERS,                                     39

TEACHERS' RESIDENCES,                                          68

RECEIPTS,                                                      72

       *       *       *       *       *

  NEW YORK:
  PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,
  Bible House, Ninth St. and Fourth Ave., New York.


  Price, 50 Cents a Year in advance.
  Entered at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., as second-class mail
    matter.




AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.


PRESIDENT, MERRILL E. GATES, LL.D., MASS.


_Vice-Presidents._

  Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. ALEX. MCKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.
  Rev. HENRY A. STIMSON, D.D., N. Y.
  Rev. WASHINGTON GLADDEN, D.D., Ohio.


_Honorary Secretary and Editor._

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Corresponding Secretaries._

  Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D., Rev. F. P. WOODBURY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._
  Rev. C. J. RYDER, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Recording Secretary._

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Treasurer._

  H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _Bible House, N. Y._


_Auditors._

  GEORGE S. HICKOK.
  JAMES H. OLIPHANT.


_Executive Committee._

  CHARLES L. MEAD, Chairman.
  CHARLES A. HULL, Secretary.


  _For Three Years._

  SAMUEL HOLMES,
  SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
  CHARLES L. MEAD,
  WILLIAM H. STRONG,
  ELIJAH HORR.


  _For Two Years._

  WILLIAM HAYES WARD,
  JAMES W. COOPER,
  LUCIEN C. WARNER,
  JOSEPH H. TWICHELL,
  CHARLES P. PEIRCE.


  _For One Year._

  CHARLES A. HULL,
  ADDISON P. FOSTER,
  ALBERT J. LYMAN,
  NEHEMIAH BOYNTON,
  A. J. F. BEHRENDS.


_District Secretaries._

  Rev. GEO. H. GUTTERSON, _21 Cong'l House, Boston, Mass._
  Rev. JOS. E. ROY, D.D., _153 La Salle Street, Chicago, Ill._


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

  Miss D. E. EMERSON, _Bible House, N. Y._


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to the
Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances, to the
Treasurer; letters relating to woman's work, to the Secretary of the
Woman's Bureau.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, Bible House, New York; or, when more
convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational House,
Boston, Mass., or 153 La Salle Street, Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty
dollars constitutes a Life Member.

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label"
indicates the time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made
in date on label to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription
be made afterward the change on the label will appear a month later.
Please send early notice of change in post-office address, giving the
former address and the new address, in order that our periodicals and
occasional papers may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I GIVE AND BEQUEATH the sum of ---- dollars to the 'American
Missionary Association,' incorporated by act of the Legislature of the
State of New York." The will should be attested by three witnesses.


       *       *       *       *       *

The AMERICAN MISSIONARY

VOL. L.    FEBRUARY, 1896.     No. 2.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE OUTLOOK.


The debt-showing in our treasury has varied during the last few months.
At the close of August, 1895, it reached its highest point during that
fiscal year, amounting to $101,151.66. During the next three months it
was reduced considerably below that highest figure; but now, at the
close of December, it has reached the amount of $104,943.95. It would be
difficult to show in detail the reasons for these changes. But the last
figure is the highest ever reached in the history of the Association,
and if we could not look with faith beyond, it would be discouraging.
But we cannot be despondent in view of the past. Discouragements have
been incident in every stage of progress in this connection. In the old
anti-slavery days there were times of almost hopeless discouragement. In
the great struggle for the life of the nation and the emancipation of
the slave there were days when only the bravest had hope. And in these
last days of reconstruction and of the work for elevating the Freedmen,
there have been very dark hours. But thus far triumph has come in the
end. We believe that God, who led the Children of Israel out of Egypt
and through the wilderness and never ceased his care till the people
were planted in their own land, with their homes and olive yards, will
not desert this larger company which he has brought with a high hand out
of bondage. We believe, too, that the merciful Saviour who regards every
good work done for the poorest and most helpless as done unto himself,
will not desert an organization that devotes itself earnestly and
successfully to the elevation of these needy races.

We, therefore, bate not one jot of heart or hope, but trusting in the
faithfulness of our Heavenly Father, and in the self-sacrificing and
conscientious liberality of his followers, we yet believe that this
debt will be removed and the means be furnished for the continuance and
enlargement of this great work. Hence, we repeat the call we have
already made to pastors, churches, Sunday-schools, Christian Endeavor
Societies, and to individuals, to make this our Year of Jubilee, the
time of emancipation and deliverance.




LINCOLN MEMORIAL DAY.


Two years ago the American Missionary Association introduced a new day
in the church calendars. The pastors of our Congregational fellowship
were asked to observe the Lincoln Memorial Day on the Sabbath nearest to
the birthday of our greatest President. This request was generally
responded to and sermons and responsive services were held in
commemoration of Abraham Lincoln's birth. A Concert Exercise was
prepared by the Association which was used very largely.

This year Lincoln Memorial Day comes on Sunday, February 16, and we
trust will prove a day of wide observance among the Congregational
churches. It is, as our readers all know, the Jubilee Year of the
American Missionary Association. Special collections are most
appropriate this year and are being pledged by many of the churches in
behalf of the great work of the American Missionary Association among
the neglected millions of our own land and to roll up this Jubilee
offering on the Jubilee Year.

Special envelopes have been printed and will be furnished any of the
pastors who desire to celebrate Lincoln Memorial Day in taking this
special collection for the Association. The Concert Exercise will be
sent to the pastor or superintendent in any Sunday-school who may desire
to add their gift to awaken a wider interest in this work. Abraham
Lincoln was born on the edge of the great region occupied by the
mountaineers of the South, or "American Highlanders" as we like to call
them. Among these people the American Missionary Association has
established its churches, schools and missions, and they have loyally
responded in cooeperation in the spread of an intelligent gospel among
the two and a half million people.

The work among the Negroes must always be associated with the name of
Abraham Lincoln, who lifted them from slavery into freedom and gave his
life a willing sacrifice to the cause of their liberation and the
salvation of our country.

The work of no other society gathers so immediately about the name of
Abraham Lincoln as does that of the American Missionary Association, and
we trust that Lincoln Memorial Day will be celebrated by the churches
throughout the land, and that large special offerings will pour into the
Association's treasury to bring emancipation from debt and furnish the
means for larger labor this glad Jubilee Year.




"PAT'S MISS'N BOX."

BY MRS. E. C. READ.


[Illustration]

In one of our Kansas missionary societies a mulatto woman was employed
as housekeeper. She has a very bright and attractive little girl, not
yet three years old, whose full name is Alice May Lapsly. By the young
lady of the house she has been pet-named "Pat," and so is called "little
Pat" by the ladies of the missionary society. "Little Pat" became
greatly interested in the young lady's mission box, and wanted one for
herself. The young lady procured a little modern barrel for her, and the
child has saved all the money that has been given her for candy etc.,
putting it in her "miss'n barral" saying it was to help build a chapel.
She began putting her pennies in the barrel when two-and-a-half years
old. At the end of three months she brought it to the ladies as they
were preparing to send their money to the treasurer. On opening, little
Pat's barrel was found to contain one dollar and two cents, which the
ladies have sent to the American Missionary Association for the colored
schools of the South. They hope the gift and story of "little Pat" may
bring courage to the workers and lead others to save their pennies to
help feed Christ's lambs. Little Pat is not weary in well doing, but is
again collecting money for missions. Soon after the barrel was emptied a
book agent called at the house. Pat went up to him as he stood in the
door, clasped her arms about his knees and looking up said: "If you dive
me some money for my miss'n box Desus will like you." The man looked at
her and gave her half a dollar, saying: "The idea of a little thing like
that asking for money for missions," and with a queer look on his face
which Pat's mother described by saying, "he looked as if he was going to
cry," he turned and walked off without describing his book.

Truly, "A little child shall lead them."




THE PROBLEM OF ILLITERACY.


The question of illiteracy among the peoples that come to us from
foreign lands is one of great importance. The large percentage of those
unable to read and write sent to us from Europe startles us. When we
come, however, to compare the percentage of illiteracy in the lands
represented by the larger body of immigrants with the illiteracy in our
own Southern States the insignificance of the former is at once evident.
The great body of illiterates are not those who come from across the
ocean, but those who are born and bred in our own land--native
Americans. That this is most emphatically true the following table
gathered from the last census reports abundantly proves:

     Ireland,     percentage of illiteracy       23
     France,           "     "      "            15
     Netherlands,      "     "      "            14
     England,          "     "      "             9
     Scotland,         "     "      "             6
     Switzerland,      "     "      "             5
     Germany,          "     "      "             4
     Scandinavia,      "     "      "             3

The following tables are compiled from the United States Census of 1890,
and represent the condition in our Southern States:

                     Total Population.     Native White.

     Alabama              41%                18-4/10%
     Florida              27-8/10%           11-3/10%
     Georgia              39-8/10%           16-3/10%
     Kentucky             21-6/10%           16-1/10%
     Mississippi          40%                11-9/10%
     South Carolina       45%                18-1/10%
     North Carolina       35-7/10%           23-1/10%
     Tennessee            26-6/10%           18%
     Virginia             30%                14%
     Louisiana            45-8/10%           20-1/10%

From this table it will be seen that no foreign country of all the list
given above equals in illiteracy any one of these Southern states with
the exception of Tennessee.

It will be also noted that eliminating the Negro factor from the South
and taking simply our native white population the percentage of
illiteracy in North Carolina of this class is one-tenth of one per cent,
greater than the percentage of illiteracy in Ireland, the most
illiterate of all these given.

This is an amazing fact and ought to startle us all into more earnest
efforts to lift up out of the darkness of ignorance and illiteracy this
great mass of people, black and white, in our Southern states. It
absolutely destroys the weight of the argument so often heard in
presenting the dangers threatening our country on account of the
ignorance of foreign immigrants. This alarm bell is muffled when we
hear the alarm echo from Southern lowlands and mountains.

Another startling fact revealed by careful study of the census tables of
1890 concerning illiteracy is this: In every case the percentage of
illiteracy of the native white population in these states is _greater_
than that of the foreign white population in the same states. To
illustrate: In Alabama the native white population is 18-4/10 per cent.
The foreign white population show an illiteracy of 7-3/10 per cent. In
Louisiana the native white population has 20-3/10 per cent. illiteracy,
the foreign white 18-7/10 per cent. This principle holds good
throughout. It is becoming in those of us who are patriotic not to boast
too much concerning the education of our own people, or to urge the
ignorance of those who come from abroad. The greatest problem before our
Christian patriotism of to-day is the removal of this dark cloud of
illiteracy in our own Southern states and the bringing in of the light
of an intelligent Christianity.




FIELD WORKERS.


We publish in this number of the MISSIONARY the annual list of
our Field Workers. We wish our readers to follow them to their appointed
locations, where they are now busied in the peculiar toils and anxieties
incident to all who are engaged in their special callings. We say these
are peculiar, for we believe that the faithful preacher and teacher
carry special burdens of care and anxiety that tax not only the body and
mind, but weigh most heavily on the heart. When Paul enumerates the
great burdens which rest upon him, he names as last and greater than all
outer "that which presseth upon me daily anxiety for all the churches."

But beyond all this, the toilers in the South, laboring as they do among
the poorest and most ignorant in the land, have added trials in meagre
salaries and limited means for enlargement, and especially in an
environment if not hostile yet unsympathetic. The people for whom they
labor are held down under a severe race prejudice, and their preachers
and teachers must share the odium with them. We gladly admit that the
prejudice in the South against our workers is in many places moderating,
yet it remains as a trial and a hindrance felt in no other part of our
land. These discouraging features occur to some extent in all parts of
our field--among the mountaineers, the Indians, and the Chinese on the
Pacific Coast. Poverty and ignorance are common to all, and the race
prejudice that confronts the Indian and the Chinese is scarcely less
than that which rests upon the Negro in the South. But these burdens
our workers are willing to bear as followers of Him who spent His life
among the lowly and gave as the greatest proof of His divine mission
that the gospel was preached unto the poor.

But the hearts of these self-sacrificing toilers may be cheered by the
sympathy and prayers of God's people and by such liberal gifts as will
take away the continual fear of any further crippling of the work. We
ask that in the supplications in the pulpit, at the family altar and in
the closet, these consecrated men and women come in for a share in the
petitions, and we ask also that in this, our Jubilee year, our treasury
be remembered with so much liberality that it may be indeed for this
great work a year of release.




THE ABRAHAM LINCOLN CENT SOCIETY.

REV. SPENCER SNELL.


We at Talladega are doing what we can by our pennies toward getting the
American Missionary Association out of debt. The Abraham Lincoln Cent
Society, which grew out of our effort on Lincoln Memorial Day last
February to devise some organized plan by which we might help a little,
has been the means of putting a good many pennies collected from very
poor people into the treasury at New York. Besides organizing a cent
society here an appeal was sent to other American Missionary Association
churches and schools among the colored people asking that similar
societies be organized. A number of them acted upon the suggestion, some
of them sending their money here to be forwarded by the treasurer of our
society to the New York office, and others sending it direct.

The members of these societies are asked to give one cent daily, weekly,
or monthly, according to each one's financial ability. The object is to
give every colored man, woman and child who can be reached by these
societies an opportunity to do something for the American Missionary
Association, which has done, and is doing, so much for them.

As the new school year begins we renew our efforts in the society here,
and shall try to stimulate others in the hope that much more may be done
this year than was done last year in this humble way for the great
cause.

We are trying to have the colored people feel that they are members of
the American Missionary Association and that the work which the
Association is trying to do is their work, and that the debt which
burdens the Association is their debt, which they are to share in common
with the other lowly peoples on whose account the debt has been
incurred.




THE FIELD.

1895-1896.


The following list gives the names of those who are in the work of the
Churches, Institutions and Schools of the American Missionary
Association.


THE SOUTH.

  Rev. Geo. W. Moore, Field Missionary.
   "   James Wharton, Evangelist.
   "   Gilbert Walton, General Mountain Missionary.


WASHINGTON, D. C.

THEOLOGICAL DEPARTMENT, HOWARD UNIVERSITY.

  Rev. J. E. Rankin, D.D., LL.D.,              Washington, D. C.
   "   J. L. Ewell, A.M.,                           "       "
   "   Isaac Clark, A.M.,                           "       "
   "   Sterling N. Brown, A.M.,                     "       "
   "   George O. Little, D.D.,                      "       "
   "   Charles H. Butler, A.M.,                     "       "
   "   Teunis S. Hamlin, D.D.,                      "       "
   "   Wilson A. Farnsworth, D.D.,                  "       "
   "   John T. Jenifer, D.D.,                       "       "
   "   Eugene Johnson,                              "       "
  Prof. Robert B. Warder, A.M., B.S.,               "       "
   "    Wm. J. Stephens,                            "       "

WASHINGTON (LINCOLN MEMORIAL CHURCH).

1701 11th St., N. W.

  _Pastor and Missionary_,
  Rev. E. A. Johnson,                          Washington, D. C.
  Mrs. E. A. Johnson,                               "       "

WASHINGTON (PLYMOUTH CHURCH).

  _Minister_,
  Rev. S. N. Brown,                            Washington, D. C.

WASHINGTON (PEOPLES' CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH).

  _Minister_,
  Rev. J. H. Dailey,                           Washington, D. C.


VIRGINIA.

CAPPAHOSIC.

GLOUCESTER HIGH AND INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL.

  _Principal._--Prof. W. B. Weaver,            Cappahosic, Va.

  Mrs. Anna B. Weaver,                              "       "
  Miss Carrie E. Steele,                       Charleston, S. C.
   "   Estelle I. Sprague,                     Tacoma Park, D. C.
   "   Lucy C. Wyatt,                          Gloucester, Va.
   "   Julia K. Braxton,                       Wakefield, Mass.
  Mr. David D. Weaver,                         Cappahosic, Va.
   "  Robert L. White,                              "       "
   "  James H. Lockley,                             "       "


NORTH CAROLINA.

WILMINGTON.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. F. G. Ragland,                          Wilmington, N. C.

GREGORY NORMAL INSTITUTE (613 Nun Street).

  _Principal._--Prof. F. T. Waters, A.M.,      Oberlin, O.

  Miss Florence A. Sperry,                     Rock Creek, O.
   "   Susan M. Marsh,                         Northfield, Mass.
   "   L. J. Hanscom,                          Winthrop, Me.
   "   Georgia M. Belyea,                      Ashland, N. B.
   "   Carlotta B. Leonard,                    Detroit, Mich.
   "   Minnie T. Strout,                       Salem, Mass.
   "   Katharine M. Jacobs,                    S. Hadley Falls, Mass.
   "   Mary L. Thompson,                       Rouses' Point, N. Y.
   "   Emma J. Bryce,                          Springfield, Ont.
  Mrs. Lucy M. Mellen,                         Oberlin, O.

BEAUFORT.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. J. P. Sims,                             Beaufort, N. C.

WASHBURN SEMINARY.

  _Principal._--Prof. Fred. S. Hitchcock,      Cambridgeport, Mass.

  Mrs. Fred. S. Hitchcock,                           "          "
  Miss Ella Louise Cheney,                     Oberlin, O.
   "   Rosa K. Schwarz,                        Belden, O.
   "   Elizabeth Cheney,                       Oberlin, O.

DUDLEY.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. S. P. Smith,                            Dudley, N. C.

RALEIGH.

  _Minister and General Missionary_,
  Rev. A. W. Curtis, D.D.,                     Raleigh, N. C.

OAKS, CEDAR CLIFF AND MELVILLE.

  _Minister and Missionary_,
  Rev. Anthony Peden,                          Oaks, N. C.

  _Missionary at Oaks_,
  Miss A. E. Farrington,                       Oaks, N. C.

  _Teacher at Cedar Cliff_,
  Mr. Wm. R. Hall,                             Raleigh, N. C.

  _Teacher at Melville_,
  Miss Fannie Forest,                          Swepsonville, N. C.

McLEANSVILLE AND GREENSBORO.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. S. S. Sevier,                           McLeansville, N. C.

  _Teacher at McLeansville_,
  Mrs. S. S. Sevier,                           McLeansville, N. C.

CHAPEL HILL.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. Paul L. LaCour,                         Chapel Hill, N. C.

  _Teachers_,
  Rev. Paul L. LaCour,                         Chapel Hill, N. C.
  Mrs. Paul L. LaCour,                             "    "     "

HILLSBORO.

  _Teachers_,
  Miss Bessie C. Bechan,                       Toronto, Canada.
   "   Julia H. Curtis,                        Syracuse, N. Y.

HIGH POINT.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. E. W. Stratton,                         High Point, N. C.

STRIEBY AND SALEM.

  Rev. Z. Simmons,                             Strieby, N. C.

TROY AND NALLS.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. O. Faduma,                              Troy, N. C.

  _Teachers at Troy_,
  Mrs. O. Faduma,                              Troy, N. C.
  Miss Amanda F. Moore,                        Ocala, Fla.

DRY CREEK AND PEKIN.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. W. D. Newkirk,                          Dry Creek, N. C.

  _Teacher at Pekin_,
  Miss Malsie D. Green,                        Pekin, N. C.

  _Teacher at Nalls_,
  Mr. B. H. Saunders,                          Nalls, N. C.

HAYWOOD, DOUGLAS, BROADWAY AND CEDAR CREEK.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. J. E. McNeill,                          Moncure, N. C.

LITTLE'S MILLS AND MALEE.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. Geo. R. Morris,                         Little's Mills, N. C.

BROWN'S SUMMIT (Union).

  _Minister_,
  Rev. H. Dillard,                             McLeansville, N. C.

PAW CREEK, LOWELL AND SOUTH POINT.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. A. L. De Mond,                          Charlotte, N. C.

SANFORD.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. Henry Williams,                         Sanford, N. C.

CHARLOTTE AND INDIAN TRAIL.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. Geo. H. Haines,                         Charlotte, N. C.

CARTER'S MILLS.

  _Teacher and Preacher_,
  Rev. S. A. Stanford,                         Carter's Mills.

ALL HEALING (KING'S MOUNTAIN P. O.).

LINCOLN ACADEMY.

  _Principal._--Miss Lillian S. Cathcart,      Minneapolis, Minn.

  Miss May E. Newton,                          Springfield, Mo.
   "   Susie T. Cathcart,                      Tangerine, Fla.
   "   Isadore M. Caughey,                     North Kingsville, Ohio.
   "   Laura A. Dickinson,                     North Amherst, Mass.
   "   Carrie W. Parrott,                      Orange Park, Fla.

LINCOLN ACADEMY CHURCH.

  _Lay Pastor_,
  Miss L. S. Cathcart,                         Minneapolis, Minn.

ENFIELD.

JOS. K. BRICK AGRICULTURAL, INDUSTRIAL AND NORMAL SCHOOL.

  _Principal._--Prof. T. S. Inborden,          Oberlin, Ohio.

  Mrs. S. J. E. Inborden,                         "       "
  Mr. L. J. Watkins,                           Nashville, Tenn.
  Miss M. M. Jackson,                          Greenville, Tenn.
   "   Ella May Thomason,                      Athens, Ala.

BLOWING ROCK.

SKYLAND INSTITUTE.

  _Principal._--Mrs. E. R. Dorsett,            Oberlin, Ohio.

  Miss A. R. Mitchell,                         Acworth, N. H.
   "   L. L. Goar,                             Montevideo, Minn.
   "   N. S. Dennis,                           Salem, Mich.

SALUDA.

  _Pioneer Evangelist_,
  Rev. E. W. Hollies,                          Topeka, Kan.

SALUDA SEMINARY.

  _Principal._--Miss Mary C. Phelps, Ph.B.,   Nova, Ohio.

  Miss Mary L. Baird,                         Mallet Creek, Ohio.
   "   Minnie A. Hollies,                     Topeka, Kan.
  Rev. E. W. Hollies,                            "     "
  Mrs. S. Hollies,                               "     "

WHITTIER.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. Joseph Cadwallader,                     Whittier, N. C.

  _Teachers_,
  Rev. Robert Humphrey,                        Whittier, N. C.
  Mrs. Olive A. Humphrey,                          "      "

BREVARD, DUNN'S CREEK, GOLDEN VALLEY AND ISLAND CREEK.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. W. A. Hamet,                            Brevard, N. C.

HENRIETTA, McCLURD'S, MOORHEAD AND PRIM'S GROVE.

  _Minister_,
  ---- ----                                    ----


SOUTH CAROLINA.

CHARLESTON.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. George C. Rowe,[A]                      Charleston, S. C.

AVERY NORMAL INSTITUTE (57, 59 Bull Street).

  _Principal._--Prof. Morrison A. Holmes,      Lee, Mass.

  Miss Mattie M. Marsh, A.B.,                  Bryan, Ohio.
   "   Mary W. Bryant, A.B.,                   Deli Rapids, S. D.
   "   Adele B. Spence,                        Snow Hill, Md.
  Mr. Edward A. Lawrence,                      Charleston, S. C.
  Miss Mary L. Deas,                                "       "
   "   Marion R. Birnie,                            "       "
   "   Ida C. Chapin,                          Gasport, N. Y.
  Mrs. M. A. Holmes,                           Lee, Mass.

GREENWOOD.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. J. M. Robinson,                         Detroit, Mich.

BREWER NORMAL SCHOOL.

  _Principal._--Rev. J. M. Robinson,           Detroit, Mich.

  Mrs. J. M. Robinson,                            "      "
  Miss Bessie L. Depew,                        Mallet Creek, Ohio.
  " Fannie E. Curtiss,                         Nevada, Ia.
  " Emily R. Bishop,                           Keene, N. H.
  " Clara S. Boyd,                             Springfield, Ohio.
  " Mary E. Hoover,                            Rushville, N. Y.
  " Alice A. Holmes,                           Lansing, Mich.

COLUMBIA AND POMARIA.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. E. H. Wilson,                           Columbia, S. C.

VEIGHL CHAPEL.

  _Lay Preacher_,
  Mr. Jefferson Miles,                         Columbia, S. C.

NEWBERRY.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. J. H. Stanard,                          Newberry, S. C.


GEORGIA.

ATLANTA.

FIRST CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH.[B]

  _Minister_,
  Rev. H. H. Proctor,                          Nashville, Tenn.

STORRS SCHOOL (120 Houston St.).

  _Principal._--Miss Ella E. Roper,            Worcester, Mass.

  Miss Jennie L. Blowers,                      Westfield, N. Y.
   "   Laura Humphries,                        Marathon, Iowa.
   "   Alice A. Clarke,                        North Hannibal, N. Y.
   "   Bena P. Gummersbach,                    New York, N. Y.
   "   Nina E. Mosher,                         Painesville, Ohio.
  Mrs. A. S. Webber,                           Worcester, Mass.

MACON.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. J. R. McLean,                           Macon, Ga.

BALLARD NORMAL SCHOOL (806 Pine St.).

  _Principal._--Prof. Geo. C. Burrage, Ph.B.,  Worcester, Mass.

  Miss Eva F. Chesley,                         East Barrington, N. H.
   "   Ada M. Sprague (deceased),              Keene, Ohio.
   "   Winona Graffam,                         Andover, Mass.
   "   Ellen B. Scobie,                        Everett, Ohio.
   "   Carrie E. Browne,                       W. Broomfield, N. Y.
   "   Jean B. Butler,                         Newcastle, Pa.
   "   M. Josephine Harper,                    Medina, Ohio.
   "   Anne M. Woodruff,                       Roseview, N. Y.
   "   Lincolnia C. Haynes,                    Macon, Ga.
  Mr. John Orr,                                Macon, Ga.
  Miss Mary E. Simonds,                        Hartland, Wis.
   "   Clara A. Dole,                          Parkman, Ohio.
  Mrs. George C. Burrage,                      Worcester, Mass.

SAVANNAH.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. L. B. Maxwell,[C]                       Savannah, Ga.

BEACH INSTITUTE (30 Harris St.).

  _Principal._--Miss Julia B. Ford,            Morristown, N. J.

  Miss Jennie Mathias,                         Cranesville, N. Y.
   "   May Belle Nicholson,                    Kalamazoo, Mich.
  Miss Julia A. Condict,                       Adrian, Mich.
   "   Julia E. McMillan,                      Oberlin, Ohio.
   "   Nellie J. Arnott,                       Nashua, Iowa.
   "   Florence L. Ellis,                      New York, N. Y.
   "   Louisa C. Holman,                       Vincennes, Iowa.

THOMASVILLE.

  _Minister and Missionary_,
  Rev. F. W. Sims,                             Thomasville, Ga.

ALLEN NORMAL AND INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL.

  _Principal._--Miss Amelia Merriam,             Westboro, Mass.

  Miss C. M. Dox,                              Kalamazoo, Mich.
   "   Nellie D. Sheldon,                      Seattle, Wash.
   "   C. E. Bishop,                           New Haven, Conn.
   "   B. R. Parmenter,                        Rockford, Iowa.
   "   Frances N. Williams,                    Orange, N. J.
   "   M. A. Kinney,                           Whitewater, Wis.
  Mr. H. C. Sargent,                           Thomasville, Ga.

McINTOSH.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. R. B. Johns,                            McIntosh, Ga.

DORCHESTER ACADEMY.

  _Principal._--Prof. Fred. W. Foster,         Castine, Me.

  Miss Janetta Knowlton,                       Creston, Ohio.
   "   Jennie Curtis,                          Great Barrington, Mass.
   "   S. Josephine Scott,                     Hamilton, Ohio.
   "   Emma J. Rosecrans,                      Hammond, Ind.
   "   Nellie I. Reed,                         Oberlin, Ohio.
   "   Carrie A. Whitaker,                     Franklin, Me.
   "   Harriet E. Leach,                       Norwich, Conn.
  Mrs. Mary W. Foster,                         Castine, Me.
  Mr. Jonathan Perkins,                        Bangor, Me.
  Mrs. Jonathan Perkins,                       Bangor, Me.

CYPRESS SLASH. (P. O. McIntosh.)

  _Minister_,
  Rev. J. A. Jones,                            Talladega, Ala.

MILLER'S STATION.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. Wilson Callen,                          Savannah, Ga.

ATHENS.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. C. S. Haynes, M.D.,                     Athens, Ga.

KNOX INSTITUTE.

  _Principal._--Prof. L. S. Clark, A.M.,       Athens, Ga.

  Miss Emma S. Morton,                           "     "
   "    Eliza B. Twiggs,                         "     "
   "    A. M. Nicholson,                       Memphis, Tenn.

MARSHALLVILLE.

  _Teachers_,
  Mrs. A. W. Richardson,                       Marshallville, Ga.
  Miss Anna R. Magrath,                        Charleston, S. C.
   "   M. Nettie Crump,                        Chicago, Ill.

WOODVILLE. (P. O. Savannah.)

  _Minister and Teacher_,
  Rev. J. H. H. Sengstacke,                    Savannah, Ga.
  Mr. J. Loyd,                                     "      "

MARIETTA.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. Calvin Lane,                            Marietta, Ga.

  _Teacher_,
  Miss Anna S. Gibbes,                         Charleston, S. C.

CUTHBERT.

  Mr. F. H. Henderson,                         Cuthbert, Ga.
  Mrs. F. H. Henderson,                           "       "

ALBANY.

ALBANY NORMAL SCHOOL.

  _Principal._--Prof. Jas. L. Murray,          Pulaski, Tenn.

  Mrs. James L. Murray,                           "       "
   "   Alice Davis,                            Oberlin, Ohio.
  Mr. Isadore Martin,                          Charleston, S. C.
  Miss Laura Dickerson,                        Memphis, Tenn.

BAINBRIDGE.

WHITTIER SCHOOL.

  _Teacher_,
  Mr. A. W. Bowman,                            Bainbridge, Ga.

RUTLAND AND BYRON.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. H. T. Johnson,                          Tobesofkee, Ga.

  _Teacher at Rutland_,
  Mrs. E. L. Johnson,                          Tobesofkee, Ga.

ANDERSONVILLE.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. J. R. McLean,                           Macon, Ga.

  _Teachers_,

  _Principal._--Miss M. E. Wilcox,             Benson, Minn.
  Miss Mabel Wilcox,                             "      "

EUREKA, PORTAL, HAGAN AND ALFORDS.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. J. B. Fletcher,                         Hagan, Ga.

PINEY GROVE AND SHADY GROVE.

  _Lay Pastor_,
  Mr. W. K. Kennedy,                           Hagan, Ga.

SWAINSBORO, PILGRIM AND BETHANY.

  _Lay Pastor_,
  Mr. H. H. Williams,                          Garfield, Ga.


FLORIDA.

ORANGE PARK.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. T. S. Perry,                            Limerick, Me.

NORMAL SCHOOL.

  _Principal._--Prof. B. D. Rowlee,            East Woodstock, Conn.

  Mrs. Julia E. Rowlee,                              "          "
  Miss Caroline Wandell,                       Phoenix, N. Y.
   "   Edith M. Robinson,                      Battle Creek, Mich.
   "   Helen S. Loveland,                      Newark Valley, N. Y.
   "   A. Margaret Ball,                       Orange Park, Fla.
  Mrs. Julia E. Titus,                         Moravia, N. Y.
  Mr. O. S. Dickinson,                         West Granville, Mass.

MARTIN.

  _Principal._--Miss Mattie J. Brydie,         Athens, Ga.

  Miss Esther F. Alston,                       Charleston, S. C.
   "   Ella N. Barksdale,                      Macon, Ga.

POMONA.

  _Teacher_,
  Miss L. J. Blackmore,                        Long View, Tenn.


ALABAMA.

TALLADEGA.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. Spencer Snell,                          Talladega, Ala.

TALLADEGA COLLEGE.

  _President._--Rev. H. S. De Forest, D.D.,    Talladega, Ala.

  Rev. George W. Andrews, D.D.,                   "        "
  Rev. T. Newton Owen, A.M.,                   Utica, N. Y.
  Prof. William E. Hutchison,                  Talladega, Ala.
    "   Martin Lovering, A.B.,                 Tuckahoe, N. Y.
    "   Edwin C. Silsby,                       Talladega, Ala.
  Mr.   Edgar A. Bishop, B.S.,                      "      "
   "    George Williamson,                          "      "
  Miss Jane A. Ainsworth,                      Hyde Park, Mass.
   "   Esther A. Barnes,                       Tallmadge, Ohio.
   "   Emma F. King,                           Elmhurst, Ill.
   "   Mary Emma Landfear,                     New Haven, Conn.
   "   Caroline E. Frost, A.B.,                Methuen, Mass.
   "   H. E. White, L.B.,                      Charlotte, Mich.
   "   Estelle Bloodgood,                      Huron, S. Dak.
   "   Florence A. Frew,                       Cleveland, Ohio.
   "   Louie Savery,                           Talladega, Ala.
   "   Susan Sands, A.B.,                      Belmont, Iowa.
   "   Lena A. Tucker,                         Springboro, Pa.
   "   Mary R. De Forest,                      Talladega, Ala.
   "   Ruth K. Kingsley,                       Syracuse, N. Y.
   "   A. B. Chalfant,                         Lebanon, S. Dak.
   "   L. A. Pingree,                          Denmark, Me.
  Mrs. A. E. Foote,                            Omaha, Neb.

MOBILE.

  _Minister_,
  ---- ----                                    ----

EMERSON INSTITUTE.

  _Principal._--Prof. Geo. A. Woodard,         Manly, N. C.

  Miss Mary L. Nichol,                         Neligh, Neb.
   "   Lillian J. Beecroft,                    Madison, Wis.
   "   May Lime,                               Port Carbon, Pa.
  Miss M. Elisabeth Messick,                   Zanesville, Ohio.
   "  Mary E. McLane,                          New Haven, Conn.

MARION.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. William J. Larkin,                      Marion, Ala.

LINCOLN NORMAL SCHOOL.

  _Principal._--Rev. William J. Larkin,        Marion, Ala.

  Mrs. Sophia Larkin,                             "     "
  Miss Nellie D. Cooley,                       North Amherst, Mass.
   "   Lizzie Stapleton,                       Belle Plaine, Iowa.
   "   M. M. Gates,                            Phoenix, N. Y.
   "   Mary D. Hyde,                           Mazeppa, Minn.
   "   Harriet M. Smith,                       Troy, Iowa.

[D]MONTGOMERY.

  _Minister_,
  ---- ----                                    ----

ALCO AND BREWTON.
  _Minister_,
  Rev. J. J. Scott,                            Brewton, Ala.

ATHENS.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. M. S. Jones,                            Athens, Ala.

TRINITY SCHOOL.

  _Principal._--Miss Ada Louise Wilcox,        Monroe, Mich.

  Miss Mary E. Perkins,                        Norwich, Conn.
   "   May Knox,                               Chester, Mass.
   "   Blanche L. Ashley,                      Norwood, N. Y.
  Mrs. L. H. Williams,                         Athens, Ala.

SELMA.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. A. T. Burnell,                          Denver, Col.

BURRELL SCHOOL (366 Selma St.).

  _Principal._--Rev. A. T. Burnell, Ph.D.,     Denver, Col.

  Mrs. Mary A. Burnell, B.L.,                    "      "
  Miss Edith M. Thatcher,                      Oberlin, Ohio.
   "   Mabel M. Jones,                            "      "
   "   Ida A. Verrill,                         Alexandria, N. H.
   "   Myra J. Lamb,                           Ladoga, Wis.
  Prof. James A. Merriman,                     Selma, Ala.
  Rev. T. J. Bell,                               "     "
  Mrs. Mary A. Dillard,                          "     "

LA PINE.

  _Minister_ (_Summer Supply_),
  Rev. R. J. McCann,                           Talladega, Ala.

KYMULGA.

  _Minister_ (_Summer Supply_),
  Rev. R. W. Jackson,                          Talladega, Ala.

LAWSON AND COVE.

  _Minister_ (_Summer Supply_),
  Rev. M. L. Baldwin,                          Talladega, Ala.

SYLACAUGA,

  _Minister_,
  Rev. J. I. Donaldson,                        Talladega, Ala.

IRONATON.

  _Minister and Teacher_,
  Rev. P. O. Wailes,                           Ironaton, Ala.

JENIFER.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. J. B. Grant,                            Talladega, Ala.

SHELBY IRON WORKS.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. A. Simmons,                             Shelby, Ala.

CHILDERSBURG.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. W. P. Hamilton,                         Talladega, Ala.

ANNISTON.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. James Brown,                            Anniston, Ala.

GADSDEN AND FORT PAYNE.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. J. R. Sims,                             Talladega, Ala.

BIRMINGHAM AND PRATT CITY.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. James Bond,                             Painesville, Ohio.

NEW DECATUR.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. R. K. Stetson,                          Chicago, Ill.

NAT (BENDING OAKS).

GREEN ACADEMY.

  _Principal._--Prof. H. E. Sargent,           Clearwater, Minn.

  Mrs. H. E. Sargent,                               "        "
  Miss Edith M. Hatfield,                      Charlestown, Ohio.
   "   Libbie A. Hatfield,                          "        "

FLORENCE.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. William L. Johnson,                     Florence, Ala.

CARPENTER HIGH SCHOOL.

  _Teacher_,
  Miss Mary Lucy Corpier,                      Florence, Ala.

COTTON VALLEY (P. O. FORT DAVIS).

COTTON VALLEY SCHOOL.

  _Principal._--Miss Lilla V. Davis,           Boston, Mass.

  Miss Corrie N. Johnson,                      Oberlin, Ohio.
   "   Katherine C. Dowdell,                   Albany, Ga.

JOPPA.

NORMAL AND INDUSTRIAL COLLEGIATE INSTITUTE.

  _Principal._--Rev. John C. Campbell,         Andover, Mass.

  Miss Hattie M. Fairchild,                    Frankfort, Mich.

BLOCTON AND BELLE SUMPTER.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. D. M. Lewis,                            Blocton, Ala.


TENNESSEE.

NASHVILLE.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. Chas. W. Dunn, A.M., B.D.,              Nashville, Tenn.

FISK UNIVERSITY.

  _President._--Rev. E. M. Cravath, D.D.,      Nashville, Tenn.

  Rev. A. K. Spence, A.M.,                         "       "
   "   F. A. Chase, A.M.,                          "       "
   "   E. C. Stickel, A.M.,                        "       "
  Prof. Charles W. Dunn, A.M., B.D.,               "       "
  Rev. Eugene Harris, A.M., B.D.,                  "       "
  Prof. H. C. Morgan, A.M.,                        "       "
  Prof. H. H. Wright, A.M.,                    Nashville, Tenn.
  Miss Anna T. Ballantine,                         "       "
   "   Dora A. Scribner, B.A.,                 Gossville, N. H.
   "   Mary A. Spence, M.A.,                   Nashville, Tenn.
   "   Mary A. Bye, B.S.,                      Minneapolis, Minn.
   "   Alice M. Garsden,                       Westmoreland, N. Y.
   "   Josephine Beard, B.A.,                  Andover, Mass.
   "   Clara L. Blake, B.A.,                   Nashua, N. H.
  Mrs. Eleanor J. Pond,                        Washington, D. C.
  Miss Nellie F. Comings,                      St. Paul, Minn.
   "   Carrie B. Chamberlin,                   Sharon, Vt.
   "   Mary T. Richardson, B.A.,               Neponset, Ill.
  Mrs. Lucy R. Greene,                         Amherst, Mass.
  Miss Jennie A. Robinson,                     Nashville, Tenn.
   "   Mary E. Chamberlin,                         "       "
  Mrs. Luretta C. Stickel, B.L.                    "       "
  Miss Anna S. Mueller,                        Oberlin, O.
   "   Frances L. Yeomans,                     Danville, Ill.
  Mrs. W.D. McFarland,                         Granby, Conn.
  Miss Frances M. Andrews,                     Milltown, N. B.
   "   Susan A. Cooley,                        Bavaria, Kan.
  Mrs. Alice M. Brown,                         Rochester, N. Y.

NASHVILLE (HOWARD CHURCH).

  _Minister_,
  Rev. J. E. Moorland,                         Nashville, Tenn.

NASHVILLE (THIRD CHURCH, JACKSON STREET).

  _Minister_,
  Rev. E. E. Scott,                            Nashville, Tenn.

GOODLETTSVILLE.

  _Minister_,
  [Supplied from Fisk Theological Seminary.]

MEMPHIS.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. George V. Clark,                        Atlanta, Ga.

LE MOYNE INSTITUTE (294 Orleans St.).

  _Principal._--Prof. Andrew J. Steele, A.M.,  Whitewater, Wis.

  Miss Alice Harvey,                           Paw Paw, Mich.
   "   Ella A. Hamilton,                       Whitewater, Wis.
   "   Luella Waring,                          Kalamazoo, Mich.
   "   Celestia S. Goldsmith,                  Chester, N. H.
  Miss Louise B. Wright,                       Quasqueton, Iowa.
   "   Rose Bigelow,                           Galesville, Wis.
  Mrs. Mary L. Jenkins,                        Chautauqua, N. Y.
   "   Virginia C. Logie,                      Wellston, Mo.
  Mr. O. R. Brown,                             Downers Grove, Ill.
  Mrs. O. R. Brown,                                "      "     "
  Miss Mary E. Brereton,                       Acorn, Wis.
  Mr. Elias S. Webb,                           Memphis, Tenn.
  Miss Emma O. Kennedy,                           "      "
   "   Cornelia E. Lewis,                         "      "
   "   Charlotte Rivers,                          "      "
   "   Mary E. Johnson,                        Bailey, Tenn.

JONESBORO.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. S. A. Paris,                            Brookfield Centre, Ct.

WARNER INSTITUTE.

  _Principal._--Miss Anna R. Miner,            Lyme, Conn.

  Miss Lucy E. Fairbanks,                      Woodstock, Vt.
  Miss Belle F. Burr,                          Toronto, Canada.
  Miss Cordy Bayless,                          Jonesboro, Tenn.

KNOXVILLE.

  _Minister_,
  ---- ----                                    ----

SLATER TRAINING SCHOOL (606 Payne St.).

  _Principal._--Miss Ida F. Hubbard,           Ascutneyville, Vt.

  Miss Jessie B. Lyon,                         Rockford, Iowa.
  Miss Emilie Weiss,                           Jenkintown, Pa.
  Mrs. Minnie L. Crosthwait,                   Knoxville, Tenn.
  Miss Lena H. Kalbfleisch,                    Gettysburg, Pa.

CHATTANOOGA, TENN.[E]

  Rev. J. E. Smith,                            Chattanooga, Tenn.

TENNESSEE MOUNTAIN WORK.

GRAND VIEW.

  _Minister and Instructor in Biblical Department_,
  Rev. W. W. Dornan, B.D.,                     Somerville, Mass.

GRAND VIEW NORMAL INSTITUTE.

  _Principal._--Rev. H. W. Webb,               Andover, Mass.

  Rev. W. W. Dornan,                           Somerville, Mass.
  Miss Mary B. Spencer,                        Pine River, Wis.
   "   E. J. Lane,                             Yorkville, Ill.
   "   G. D. Huntington,                       Grand View, Tenn.
   "   Maud Taylor,                              "    "     "
   "   Mary L. Jewett,                           "    "     "
  Mrs. Carrie Ferree,                            "    "     "

PLEASANT HILL.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. W. E. Wheeler,                          Pleasant Hill, Tenn.

PLEASANT HILL ACADEMY.

  _Principal._--Rev. Warren E. Wheeler,        Richfield, Ohio.

  Mrs. Kate L. Wheeler,                            "       "
  Miss F. A. Jackson,                          Hudsonburg, Tenn.
   "   Lula M. Palmer,                         Union City, Mich.
   "   Ruth P. Harvey,                         Somerset, Ky.
   "   Emma F. Dodge,                          Pleasant Hill, Tenn.
  Mrs. S. A. Hayes,                            Wakeman, Ohio.
  Mr. Chas. R. Blanks,                         Pine Bluff, Tenn.

POMONA AND CROSSVILLE.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. H. E. Partridge,                        Pomona, Tenn.

  _Teacher at Pomona_,
  Mrs. A. E. Graves,                           Pomona, Tenn.

MOSSY GROVE AND WOLF CREEK.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. J. B. Cobble,                           Whetstone, Tenn.

DEER LODGE AND RUGBY.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. George Lusty,                           Deer Lodge, Tenn.

GLEN MARY, HELENWOOD, ROBBINS AND MILL CREEK,

  _Minister_,
  Rev. M. N. Sumner,                           Mill Creek, Tenn.

BON AIR AND ROCK HOUSE.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. E. N. Goff,                             Bon Air, Tenn.

KINDERGARTEN SCHOOL.

  _Teacher._--Miss Viola Young,                Bon Air, Tenn.

HARRIMAN.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. C. B. Riggs,                            Harriman, Tenn.

JELLICO AND PROCTOR.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. L. C. Partridge,                        Jellico, Tenn.

  _Teachers_,
  Miss Kenada,                                 Jellico, Tenn.
   "   Bertha Davis,                              "      "

PINE MOUNTAIN.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. Samuel Sutton,                          Williamsburg, Ky.

BIG CREEK GAP.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. George Ames,                            Berea, Ky.

  _Teachers_,
  Miss Kate LaGrange,                          Feura Bush, N. Y.
   "   Ollie LaGrange,                           "    "     "

CUMBERLAND GAP.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. A. A. Myers,                            Cumberland Gap, Tenn.

HARROW SCHOOL.

  _Principal._--Prof. A. D. Luethi,            Chicago, Ill.

  Mrs. A. A. Myers,                            Cumberland Gap, Tenn.
  Miss Mabel A. Wightman,                      Rock Creek, Ohio.
   "   L. Belle Knott,                         Clifton, Ohio.
   "   I. Ola Akin,                            Waterloo, Iowa.

TRACY CITY AND MOUNT EAGLE.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. M. J. Smith,                            Tracy City, Tenn.


KENTUCKY.

LEXINGTON.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. J. S. Jackson,                          Lexington, Ky.

CHANDLER NORMAL SCHOOL (351 North Broadway).

  _Principal._--Miss Fanny J. Webster,         Sacramento, Cal.

  Miss Mary J. Kuhn,                           New Wilmington, Pa.
   "   Susan I. Estabrook,                     Olivet, Mich.
   "   Margaret R. Spence,                     Snow Hill, Md.
   "   Mary H. Ewans,                          Bellefontaine, Ohio.
   "   Emma J. Robinson,                       Portland, Me.
   "   Susa H. Breck,                          Topeka, Kan.
   "   Mary S. Larkin,                         Marion, Ala.

HAND PRIMARY SCHOOL.

  Miss Emily P. Jones,                         Ann Arbor, Mich.
   "   Eva D. Bowles,                          Columbus, Ohio.

LOUISVILLE.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. E. G. Harris,                           Washington, D. C.

KENTUCKY MOUNTAIN WORK.

WILLIAMSBURG.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. W. G. Olinger, Williamsburg, Ky.

WILLIAMSBURG ACADEMY.

  _Principal._--Prof. Chas. M. Stevens,        Williamsburg, Ky.

  Miss Ella M. Andrews,                        Frankfort, Mich.
   "   Amelia L. Ferris,                       Oneida, Ill.
   "   M. Amelia Packard,                      Brooklyn, N. Y.
   "   E. A. Buell,                            Union City, Mich.
   "   Julia B. Glines,                        Elmira, N. Y.
   "   Nora Hill,                              Williamsburg, Ky.
   "   Minnie Ferree,                          Harriman, Tenn.
  Rev. George Ames,                            Berea, Ky.

ROCKHOLD, CORBIN, WOODBINE AND PLEASANT VIEW.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. C. W. Green,                            Corbin, Ky.

  _Teachers_,
  Rev. C. W. Green,                            Corbin, Ky.
  Miss Lillian L. Warner,                      Union City, Mich.

CLOVER BOTTOM, GRAY-HAWK, COMBS AND MIDDLE FORK.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. Mason Jones,                            Combs, Ky.

CARPENTER, MARSH CREEK AND LICK CREEK.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. Samuel Sutton,                          Williamsburg, Ky.

  _Teacher_,
  Mr. James Higginbotham,                      Williamsburg, Ky.

RED ASH.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. L. C. Partridge,                        Jellico, Tenn.

MORGAN AND WOLFE COUNTY MISSIONS.

SPRADLING, MAYTOWN, FLAT ROCK AND CAMPTON.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. J. W. Doane,                            Campton, Ky.

TOLIVER.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. J. W. Doane,                            Campton, Ky.

BLACK MOUNTAIN (P. O. EVARTS).

  _Minister_,
  Rev. Herbert Carleton, A.M.,                 Evarts, Ky.

BLACK MOUNTAIN ACADEMY.

  Rev. Herbert Carleton, A.M.,                 Evarts, Ky.
  Miss L. Middleton,                             "      "

SANDER'S CREEK.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. Samuel Sutton,                          Williamsburg, Ky.


ARKANSAS.

LITTLE ROCK.

  _Minister and Teacher_,
  Rev. Y. B. Sims,                             Talladega, Ala.

HELENA.

HELENA NORMAL SCHOOL.

  _Principal._--Prof. Chas. W. Driskell, B.S., Stanfordville, Ga.

  Mrs. Chas. W. Driskell,                          "         "
  Miss Lucy W. Parker,                         Marion, Ala.
   "   Elnora Winter,                          Nashville, Tenn.


OKLAHOMA.

GUTHRIE.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. Thomas J. Austin,                       Jackson, Tenn.


MISSISSIPPI.

TOUGALOO.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. Frank G. Woodworth, D.D.,               Tougaloo, Miss.

TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY, MISS.

  Rev. F. G. Woodworth, D.D.,                  Tougaloo, Miss.
  Prof. E. C. Moore, A.M.,                     New York, N. Y.
  Mr. L. J. Carrier,                           Phoenix, N. Y.
   "  F. H. Ball,                              Worcester, Mass.
   "  A. H. Bennett,                           Holden, Mass.
  Miss Lillian Woolson, A.B.,                  Boston, Mass.
  Mrs. N. E. Woodworth,                        Tougaloo, Miss.
  Miss Mary H. Loveland,                       Newark Valley, N. Y.
   "   Elizabeth H. Plumb, B.S.,               Springfield, Mo.
   "   Emma Redick,                            Mansfield, Ohio.
   "   Carrie E. Parkhurst,                    Manchester, N. H.
   "   Elizabeth Ainsworth,                    Hyde Park, Mass.
   "   Emma Robertson,                         Concord, N. H.
   "   Mary P. Roberts, B.L.,                  Jacksonville, Ill.
   "   Lura S. Hall,                           Rockland, Mass.
   "   Dorothea Lummis, M.D.,                  Los Angeles, Cal.
   "   Etta V. Stone,                          Memphis, Tenn.
  Mrs. H. C. Hecock,                           Elyria, Ohio.
  Miss Alice M. Whitsey,                       Dover, Ohio.
  Mrs. L. M. Sisson,                           Windsor, Vt.
  Miss Martha L. Shaw,                         Poughkeepsie, N. Y.

MERIDIAN.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. C. L. Harris,                           Meridian, Miss.

LINCOLN SCHOOL (2703 11TH STREET).

  _Principal._--Mrs. H. I. Miller,             Topeka, Kan.

  Miss Maria Myers,                            Kidder, Mo.
   "   Sadie Stimpson,                         Mittineague, Mass.
   "   Hattie J. Lovewell,                     Willow Springs, Mo.
   "   Ella C. Abbott,                         Winchester, Mass.
   "   Carrie E. Kendall,                      Dunstable, Mass.

MOORHEAD.

ALMEDA GARDNER SCHOOL.

  _Principal._--Miss S. L. Emerson,            Hallowell, Me.

  Miss E. L. Parsons,                          Mount Morris, N. Y.
   "   S. J. Lime,                             Port Carbon, Pa.

JACKSON.

  _Teachers_,
  Miss Mary Jane Gibson,                       Jackson, Miss.
   "   Sarah Jane Thomas,                      Summit, Miss.

MOUND BAYOU.

NORMAL INSTITUTE.

  _Teachers_,
  Mr. Isaiah T. Montgomery,                    Mound Bayou, Miss.
  Miss Mary V. Montgomery,                       "     "     "
  Mrs. Sallie P. Dozier,                       Vicksburg, Miss.

NEW RUHAMAH, PLEASANT RIDGE AND SALEM.

  _Missionary_,
  Mrs. M. A. F. Tapley,                        Columbus, Miss.


LOUISIANA.

NEW ORLEANS.

  _Minister_ (University Church).
  Rev. George W. Henderson,                    North Craftsbury, Vt.

STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY (2420 Canal Street).

  _President._--Prof. Oscar Atwood, A.M.,      Jeffersonville, Vt.

  Rev. George W. Henderson, A.M.,              North Craftsbury, Vt.
  Mr. Benjamin C. Miner, B.S.,                 New Haven, Vt.
  Miss Emily W. Nichols,                       Clinton, N. Y.
   "   Mary W. Culver,                         Buchanan, Mich.
   "   Mary J. Oertel, B.S.,                   Prairie du Lac, Wis.
  Mrs. L. St. J. Hitchcock,                    Simsbury, Conn.
  Miss Alice A. Flagg,                         Jeffersonville, Vt.
   "   Mary R. Bryant, A.M.,                   Olivet, Mich.
  Mr. George L. Dewey,                         Norwich, Conn.
  Mrs. George L. Dewey,                        Norwich, Conn.
  Mr. Emerson C. Rose,                         New Orleans, La.
   "  James D. Gordon,                         New Orleans, La.
  Miss Grace H. Ashley,                        Oberlin, Ohio.
   "   Jennie Fyfe,                            Lansing, Mich.
   "   Belle C. Harriman,                      North Craftsbury, Vt.
   "   Jeanne Forney,                          Madison, Neb.
   "   Carrie E. Hodgman,                      Princeton, Ill.

DANIEL HAND PREPARATORY SCHOOL.

  Miss Louise Denton,                         Freeport, L. I.
   "   Deborah B. Johnson,                    New Orleans, La.
  Miss Bertha D. Hodges,                      West Randolph, Vt.
   "   Belle M. Whelpley,                     Painesville, Ohio.
   "   Nellie B. de Spelder,                  Greenville, Mich.

NEW ORLEANS (CENTRAL CHURCH) INSTITUTIONAL.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. John W. Whittaker,                      New Orleans, La.

  _Assistant Minister_,
  Miss Bella W. Hume,                          New Haven, Conn.

NEW ORLEANS (SPAIN ST. CHURCH).

  _Minister_,
  Rev. Cornelius W. Johnson,                   New Orleans, La.

NEW ORLEANS (MORRIS BROWN CHURCH).

  _Minister_,
  Rev. I. H. Hall,                             New Orleans, La.

NEW IBERIA.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. C. H. Claiborne,                        New Orleans, La.

THIBODEAUX.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. J. E. Smith,                            New Orleans, La.

HAMMOND.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. H. B. Bortel,                           Hammond, La.

ROSELAND.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. W. Mitchell,                            Detroit, Mich.

BELLE PLACE.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. M. W. Whitt,                            Belle Place, La.

ABBEVILLE.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. J. A. Herod,                            Abbeville, La.

SCHRIEVER.

  (MORNING STAR AND ST. MARK'S CHURCHES.)

  _Minister_,
  Rev. William Brown,                          Schriever, La.

LOCKPORT.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. Charles Sands,                          Lockport, La.

ST. SOPHIE.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. C. W. Johnson,                          St. Sophie, La.


TEXAS.

AUSTIN.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. W. S. Goss,                             St. Johnsbury, Vt.

TILLOTSON INSTITUTE.

  _President._--Prof. W. S. Goss, A.B.,        St. Johnsbury, Vt.

  Miss Charlotte M. Estabrook,                 West Lebanon, N. H.
   "   Ida F. Hayden,                          Medford, Mass.
   "   Edith Taylor, A.B.,                     New Wilmington, Pa.
   "   Margaret E. Reed,                       Princeton, Ill.
   "   Helen L. Robertson,                     Churchville, N. Y.
   "   Sophia Crawford,                        Schroon Lake, N. Y.
   "   Phebe B. Parsons,                       Marcellus, N. Y.
   "   Marie D. Holzinger,                     Olivet, Mich.
   "   Ella A. Perley,                         Portland, Me.
   "   Maggie Portune,                         Cincinnati, Ohio.
   "   Martha J. Adams,                        Columbus, Wis.
  Mr. Fred R. Bush, A.B.,                      Orion, Mich.
   "  James S. Bingham,                        West Winsted, Conn.

CORPUS CHRISTI.

  _Minister_,
  ---- ----                                    ----

HELENA AND GOLIAD.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. Mitchell Thompson,                      Helena, Tex.

PARIS.

  _Minister_,
  Rev. A. C. Garner,                           Chicago, Ill.

  _Teachers_,
  Rev. A. C. Garner,                           Chicago, Ill.
  Mrs. A. C. Garner,                              "      "

DODD AND BODOC.

  _Minister and Teacher_,
  Rev. R. H. Henson,                           Paris, Texas.

DALLAS.

  _Minister and Teacher_,
  Rev. E. E. Sims,                             Dallas, Tex.
  Mrs. E. E. Sims,                               "      "


INDIAN MISSIONS.

SANTEE AGENCY, NEBRASKA.

NORMAL TRAINING SCHOOL.

  _Superintendent and Minister_,
  Rev. A. L. Riggs, D.D.,                      Santee Agency, Neb.

  _Teachers_,
  Mr. F. B. Riggs,                             Santee Agency, Neb.
  Miss Edith Leonard,                          Rochester, Mass.
   "   Mary A. Cody,                           Cleveland, O.
   "   Mabel Egeler,                           Wayne, Mich.

  _Native Teachers_,
  Mr. Eli Abraham,                             Santee Agency, Neb.
  Rev. James Garvie,                             "       "     "
  Mr. C. W. Hoffman,                           Elbow Woods, N. D.
  Miss Susan Wambdisun,                        Santee Agency, Neb.

  _Matrons_,
  Miss S. Lizzie Voorhees,                     Rocky Hill, N. J.
    (Boys' Cottage.)
  Miss Ella Worden,                            Santee Agency, Neb.
    (Whitney Hall.)
  Miss Annie Willerton,                        Wauwatosa, Wis.
    (Dakota Home.)
  Miss Harriet A. Brown,                       Rocky Point, N. Y.
    (Bird's Nest.)
  Mrs. E.J. Black,                             Santee Agency, Neb.
    (Dining Hall.)

  _Missionaries_,
  Mrs. A. L. Riggs,                            Santee Agency, Neb.
   "   C. R. Lawson,                             "       "     "
   "   W. H. Hamlin,                             "       "     "
   "   I. P. Wold,                               "       "     "
   "   H. L. Stone,                              "       "     "
  Miss Mary Morris (Clerk.)                      "       "     "

  _Industrial Department_,
  Iver P. Wold, Shoemaking,                    Santee Agency, Neb.
  Charles R. Lawson, Printing,                   "       "     "
  Robert Y. Gray, Blacksmithing,                 "       "     "
  William H. Hamlin, Farm Supt.,                 "       "     "
  Homer L. Stone, Bakery,                        "       "     "
  Miss Ella Worden, Cooking School,            Santee Agency, Neb.
   "   Jennie M. Lind, Sewing School,          Yankton, S. D.

  _Native Pastor_,
  Rev. Artemas Ehnamani,                       Santee Agency, Neb.

PONCA AGENCY, NEBRASKA.

  _Native Missionary_,
  Rev. James Garvie,                           Santee Agency, Neb.

CHEYENNE RIVER AGENCY, S. D.

  Rev. T. L. Riggs, _General Missionary_.

CENTRAL STATION, OAHE, SOUTH DAKOTA.

  _Minister_,
  Mr. David Lee,                               Bad River, S. D.

OAHE INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL.

  _Treasurer_,
  Mr. Elias Jacobsen,                          Oahe, S. D.

  _Teachers_,
  Mrs. T. L. Riggs,                            Oahe, S. D.
  Miss Josephine E. Desmond,                   So. Framingham, Mass.
   "   E. Jean Kennedy,                        Oahe, S. D.


OUT-STATIONS.

BAD RIVER.

  Mr. Stephen Yellow-Hawk,                     Oahe, S. D.

ELIZABETH WINYAN MEMORIAL STATION, CHEYENNE RIVER.

  Rev. Edwin Phelps,                           Collamer, S. D.
  Mrs. Ellen Phelps,                              "       "

[F]PLUM CREEK BOARDING SCHOOL, CHEYENNE RIVER.

  Mr. William M. Griffiths,                    Chicago, Ill.
  Mrs. Martha H. Griffiths,                    Ross, Ohio.

CHERRY CREEK, CHEYENNE RIVER.

  Mr. Clarence Ward,                           Leslie, S. D.
  Mrs. Estelle Ward,                             "      "

TOUCH THE CLOUD STATION, CHEYENNE RIVER.

  Mr. Justin Black-Eagle,                      Leslie, S. D.

[G]WHITEHORSE STATION, MOREAU RIVER.

  Mr. Ansel Chapin,                            Leslie, S. D.
  Mrs. Mary Chapin,                              "      "

FORT YATES HOSPITAL.

  _Physician._--Miss Louisa T. Black, M.D.,    Zanesville, Ohio.

  _Assistant._--Miss Jean Rodger,              Escanaba, Mich.

REMINGTON STATION, MOREAU RIVER.

  Mr. John Bluecloud,                          Sisseton Agency, S. D.
  Mrs. Nora Bluecloud,                            "       "      "
  Miss Dora B. Dodge,                          Brooklyn, N. Y.

HOPE STATION, MOREAU RIVER.

  Mr. Daniel Yawa,                             Moreau River, S. D.
  Mrs. Mary Yawa,                                "      "     "

THUNDER BUTTE, MOREAU RIVER.

  Mr. Daniel White-Thunder,                    Leslie, S. D.
  Mrs. Elida White-Thunder,                      "      "

STANDING ROCK AGENCY, NORTH DAKOTA.

CENTRAL STATION.

  Rev. George W. Reed,                         Springfield, Mass.
  Mrs. Charlotte M. Reed,                           "        "

ELKHORN STATION.

  Miss Mary C. Collins,                        Keokuk, Iowa.
  Mr. Huntington Wakutemani,                   Grand River, S. D.
  Mrs. Louisa Wakutemani,                        "     "     "

LONG HILL STATION.

  Miss Mary P. Lord,                           Wellesley, Mass.

OAK CREEK STATION.

  Mr. Elias Gilbert,                           Sisseton Agency, S. D.
  Mrs. Mary Gilbert,                              "       "      "

ROCK CREEK STATION.

  Mr. Simon Kirk,                              Sisseton Agency, S. D.
  Mrs. Julia Kirk,                                "       "      "

THUNDER HAWK STATION.

  Mr. David Many-Buffalo,                      Grand River, S. D.
  Mrs. Martha Many-Buffalo,                      "     "     "

MISSOURI RIVER STATION.

  [H]Mr. Arthur Tibbetts,                         Cannon Ball, N. D.

CANNON BALL STATION.

  Mr. Arthur Tibbetts,                         Cannon Ball, N. D.

ROSEBUD RESERVATION. SOUTH DAKOTA.

ROSEBUD AGENCY.

  Rev. James F. Cross,                         Rosebud Agency, S. D.
  Mrs. Stella P. Cross,                           "      "      "

BURRELL STATION (P. O. Basin, Neb.).

  Rev. Francis Frazier,                        Santee Agency, Neb.
  Mrs. Maggie Frazier,                           "      "      "

PARK STREET CHURCH STATION (White River, P. O. Stearns).

  Mr. Lot Frazier,                             Rosebud Agency, S. D.
  Mrs. Rebecca Frazier,                           "      "      "

BLACK PIPE BRANCH.

  Mr. Solomon B. Yellow-Hawk,                  Fort Pierre, S. D.
  Mrs. Josephine Yellow-Hawk,                   "     "      "

FORT BERTHOLD AGENCY, NORTH DAKOTA.

  _Superintendent and Missionaries_,
  Rev. C. L. Hall,                             Fort Berthold, N. D.
  Mrs. S. W. Hall,                              "      "       "

  _Teachers and Matrons_,
  Miss A. Z. Powell,                           Templeton, S. D.
   "   Annie R. Creighton,                     Dundee, Scotland.
   "   Annette P. Brickett,                    Haverhill, Mass.
   "   Mary E. Field,                          Conway, Mass.
  Mr. H. A. Hatch,                             Lindenville, Ohio.
  Miss Helen E. Smith,                         Cleveland, Ohio.

MOODY STATION, NO. 1 (Independence).

  Miss Elizabeth Kehoe,                        Chicago, Ill.

MOODY STATION, NO. 2 (Elbow Woods).

  Miss Harriet B. Ilsley,                      Newark, N. J.


WASHINGTON.

S'KOKOMISH AGENCY.

  _Missionary_,
  Rev. Myron Eells, D.D.,                      Union City, Wash.


MONTANA.

CROW AGENCY.

  Rev. J. G. Burgess,                          Crow Agency, Mont.
  Mrs. J. G. Burgess,                           "     "      "


CHINESE MISSIONS.

  _Superintendent_,
  Rev. Wm. C. Pond, D.D.,                      San Francisco, Cal.


CALIFORNIA.

FRESNO.

  _Teacher_,
  Mrs. J. H. Collins,                          Fresno, Cal.

LOS ANGELES.

  _Teachers_,
  Mrs. C. V. Rice,                             Los Angeles, Cal.
  Loo Ying,                                     "     "      "

MARYSVILLE.

  _Teachers_,
  Miss Mattie A. Flint,                        Marysville, Cal.
  Chung Moi,                                       "        "

OAKLAND.

  _Teachers_,
  Mrs. H. E. Hibbard,                          Oakland, Cal.
  Yip Bow,                                        "      "

OROVILLE.

  _Teachers_,
  Miss Blanche Reece,                          Oroville, Cal.
  Quong Leong,                                    "       "

PETALUMA.

  _Teachers_,
  Volunteers,                                  Petaluma, Cal.

RIVERSIDE.

  _Teacher_,
  Miss Helen Webber,                           Riverside, Cal.

SACRAMENTO,

  _Teacher_,
  Mrs. S. E. Carrington,                       Sacramento, Cal.

SAN BERNARDINO.

  _Teacher_,
  Miss Laura A. Curtis,                        San Bernardino, Cal.

SAN DIEGO.

  _Teachers_,
  Mrs. E. M. Stetson,                          San Diego, Cal.
  Hom Goon,                                     "    "     "

SAN FRANCISCO (CENTRAL).

  _Teachers_,
  Mrs. R. E. Lamont,                           San Francisco, Cal.
   "   M. A. Greene,                            "      "       "
  Miss J. G. Morrison,                          "      "       "
  Rev. Jee Gam,                                 "      "       "

SAN FRANCISCO (BARNES).

  _Teacher_,
  Miss Olive Patten,                           San Francisco, Cal.

SAN FRANCISCO (WEST).

  _Teachers_,
  Miss V. W. Lamont,                           San Francisco, Cal.
  Yip Bow,                                      "      "       "

SANTA BARBARA.

  _Teacher_,
  Mr. Eli Kimberly,                            Santa Barbara, Cal.

SANTA CRUZ.

  _Teachers_,
  Mrs. Kate V. Hall,                           Santa Cruz, Cal.
  Pon G. Fang,                                   "    "     "

VENTURA.

  _Teachers_,
  Miss Alma Bradley,                           Ventura, Cal.
  Mrs. S. West,                                   "      "

VERNONDALE.

  _Teacher_,
  Miss Ella Thomson,                           Vernondale, Cal.

WATSONVILLE.

  _Teachers_,
  Mrs. Martha Ellis,                           Watsonville, Cal.
  Joe Dun,                                         "        "


UTAH.

SALT LAKE CITY.

  _Teacher_,
  Mrs. Marcus E. Jones,                        Salt Lake City, Utah.


FOOTNOTES:

[A] Church self-supporting.

[B] Church Self-Supporting.

[C] Self-supporting church.

[D] This church self-supporting.

[E] This church is self-supporting.

[F] Supported by the Society for Propagating the Gospel.

[G] Supported by the Native Missionary Society.

[H] Supported by the Native Missionary Society.




TEACHERS' RESIDENCES.


MAINE.

  Bangor.--Mr. Jonathan Perkins, Mrs. Jonathan Perkins.
  Castine.--Prof. Fred. W. Foster, Mrs. Mary W. Foster.
  Denmark.--Miss L. A. Pingree.
  Franklin.--Miss Carrie A. Whitaker.
  Hallowell.--Miss S. L. Emerson.
  Limerick.--Rev. T. S. Perry.
  Portland.--Miss Ella A. Perley, Miss Emma J. Robinson.
  Winthrop.--Miss L. J. Hanscom.


NEW HAMPSHIRE.

  Acworth.--Miss A. R. Mitchell.
  Alexandria.--Miss Ida A. Verill.
  Chester.--Miss Celestia S. Goldsmith.
  Concord.--Miss Emma Robertson.
  East Barrington.--Miss Eva F. Chesley.
  Gossville.--Miss Dora A. Scribner, B. A.
  Keene.--Miss Emily R. Bishop.
  Manchester.--Miss Carrie E. Parkhurst.
  Nashua.--Miss Clara L. Blake.
  West Lebanon.--Miss Charlotte M. Estabrook.


VERMONT.

  Ascutneyville.--Miss Ida F. Hubbard.
  Jeffersonville.--Prof. Oscar Atwood, A.M., Miss Alice A. Flagg.
  New Haven.--Mr. Benjamin C. Miner, B.S.
  North Craftsbury.--Miss Belle C. Harriman, Rev. George W. Henderson, A.M.
  Sharon.--Miss Carrie B. Chamberlin.
  St. Johnsbury.--Rev. W. S. Goss, A.B., Mrs. W. S. Goss.
  West Randolph.--Miss Bertha D. Hodges.
  Windsor.--Mrs. L. M. Sisson.
  Woodstock.--Miss Lucy E. Fairbanks.


MASSACHUSETTS.

  Amherst.--Mrs. Lucy R. Greene.
  Andover.--Miss Josephine Beard, B.A., Rev. John C. Campbell, Miss Winona
    Graffam, Rev. H. W. Webb.
  Boston.--Miss Lilla V. Davis, Miss Lillian Woolson, A.B.
  Cambridgeport.--Prof. Fred. S. Hitchcock, Mrs. Fred. S. Hitchcock.
  Chester.--Miss May Knox.
  Conway.--Miss Mary E. Field.
  Dunstable.--Miss Carrie E. Kendall.
  Great Barrington.--Miss Jennie Curtis.
  Haverhill.--Miss Annette P. Brickett.
  Holden.--Mr. A. H. Bennett.
  Hyde Park.--Miss Elizabeth Ainsworth, Miss Jane A. Ainsworth.
  Lee.--Prof. Morrison A. Holmes, Mrs. M. A. Holmes.
  Medford.--Miss Ida F. Hayden.
  Methuen.--Miss Caroline E. Frost, A.B.
  Mittineague.--Miss Sadie Stimpson.
  North Amherst.--Miss Nellie D. Cooley, Miss Laura A. Dickinson.
  Northfield.--Miss Susan M. Marsh.
  Rochester.--Miss Edith Leonard.
  Rockland.--Miss Lura. S. Hall.
  Salem.--Miss Minnie T. Strout.
  Somerville.--Rev. W. W. Dornan, B.D.
  South Framingham.--Miss Josephine E. Desmond.
  South Hadley Falls.--Miss Katharine M. Jacobs.
  Springfield.--Rev. George W. Reed, Mrs. Charlotte M. Reed.
  Wakefield.--Miss Julia K. Braxton.
  Wellesley.--Miss Mary P. Lord.
  Westboro.--Miss Amelia Merriam.
  West Granville.--Mr. O. S. Dickinson.
  Winchester.--Miss Ella C. Abbott.
  Worcester.--Mr. F. H. Ball, Prof. George C. Burrage, Ph.B., Mrs. George
    C. Burrage, Miss Ella E. Roper, Mrs. A. S. Webber.


CONNECTICUT.

  Brookfield Centre.--Rev. S. A. Paris.
  East Woodstock.--Prof. B. D. Rowlee, Mrs. Julia E. Rowlee.
  Granby.--Mrs. W. D. McFarland.
  Lyme.--Miss Anna R. Miner.
  New Haven.--Miss C. E. Bishop, Miss Bella W. Hume, Miss Mary Emma
    Landfear, Miss Mary E. McLane.
  Norwich.--Mr. George L. Dewey, Mrs. George L. Dewey, Miss Harriet B.
    Leach, Miss Mary E. Perkins.
  Simsbury.--Mrs. L. St. J. Hitchcock.
  West Winsted.--Mr. James S. Bingham.


NEW YORK.

  Brooklyn.--Miss Dora B. Dodge, Miss M. Amelia Packard.
  Chautauqua.--Mrs. M. L. Jenkins.
  Churchville.--Miss Helen L. Robertson.
  Clinton.--Miss Emily W. Nichols.
  Cranesville.--Miss Jennie Mathias.
  Elmira.--Miss Julia B. Glines.
  Feura Bush.--Miss Kate LaGrange, Miss Ollie LaGrange.
  Freeport.--Miss Louise Denton.
  Gasport.--Miss Ida C. Chapin.
  Marcellus.--Miss Phoebe B. Parsons.
  Moravia.--Mrs. Julia E. Titus.
  Mount Morris.--Miss E. L. Parsons.
  Newark Valley.--Miss Helen S. Loveland, Miss Mary E. Loveland.
  New York.--Miss Florence L. Ellis, Miss Bena P. Gummersbach, Prof. E. C.
    Moore, A.M.
  North Hannibal.--Miss Alice A. Clarke.
  Norwood.--Miss Blanche L. Ashley.
  Phoenix.--Mr. L. J. Carrier, Miss M. M. Gates, Miss Caroline Wandell.
  Poughkeepsie.--Miss Martha L. Shaw.
  Rochester.--Mrs. Alice M. Brown.
  Rocky Point.--Miss Harriet A. Brown.
  Roseview.--Miss Anna M. Woodruff.
  Rouses' Point.--Miss Mary L. Thompson.
  Rushville.--Miss Mary E. Hoover.
  Schroon Lake.--Miss Sophia Crawford.
  Syracuse.--Miss Julia H. Curtis, Miss Ruth K. Kingsley.
  Tuckahoe.--Prof. Martin Lovering, A.B.
  Utica.--Rev T. Newton Owen, A.M.
  West Bloomfield.--Miss Carrie E. Browne.
  Westfield.--Miss Jennie L. Blowers.
  Westmoreland.--Miss Alice M. Garsden.


NEW JERSEY.

  Morristown.--Miss Julia B. Ford.
  Newark.--Miss Harriet B. Ilsley.
  Orange.--Miss Frances M. Williams.
  Rocky Hill.--Miss S. Lizzie Voorhees.


PENNSYLVANIA.

  Gettysburg.--Miss Lena H. Kalbfleisch.
  Jenkintown.--Miss Emilie Weiss.
  Newcastle.--Miss Jean B. Butler.
  New Wilmington.--Miss Mary J. Kuhn, Miss Edith Taylor, A.B.
  Port Carbon.--Miss May Lime, Miss S. J. Lime.
  Springboro.--Miss Lena A. Tucker.


MARYLAND.

  Snow Hill.--Miss Adele B. Spence, Miss Margaret R. Spence.


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.

  Tacoma Park.--Miss Estelle I. Sprague.
  Washington.--Rev. Sterling N. Brown, A.M., Rev. Charles H. Butler, A.M.,
    Rev. Isaac Clark, A.M., Rev. J. H. Dailey, Rev. J. L. Ewell, A.M.,
    Rev. Wilson A. Farnsworth, D.D., Rev. Teunis S. Hamlin, D.D., Rev.
    E. G. Harris, Rev. John T. Jenifer, D.D., Rev. Eugene Johnson, Rev.
    E. A. Johnson, Mrs E. A. Johnson, Rev. Geo. O. Little, D.D., Mrs.
    Eleanor J. Pond, Rev. J. E. Rankin, D.D., LL.D., Prof. Wm. J.
    Stephens, Prof. Robert B. Warder, A.M., B.S.


OHIO.

  Belden.--Miss Rosa K. Schwarz.
  Bellefontaine.--Miss Mary H. Ewans.
  Bryan.--Miss Mattie M. Marsh, A.B.
  Charlestown.--Miss Edith M. Hatfield, Miss Libbie A. Hatfield.
  Cincinnati.--Miss Maggie Portune.
  Cleveland.--Miss Mary A. Cody, Miss Florence A. Frew, Miss Helen E.
    Smith.
  Clifton.--Miss L. Belle Knott.
  Columbus.--Miss Eva D. Bowles.
  Creston.--Miss Janetta Knowlton.
  Dover.--Miss Alice M. Whitsey.
  Elyria.--Mrs. H. C. Hecock.
  Everett.--Miss Ellen B. Scobie.
  Hamilton.--Miss S. Josephine Scott.
  Keene.--Miss Ada M. Sprague (Deceased).
  Lindenville.--Mr. H. A. Hatch.
  Mallet Creek.--Miss Bessie L. Depew, Miss Mary L. Baird.
  Mansfield.--Miss Emma Redick.
  Medina.--Miss M. Josephine Harper.
  North Kingsville.--Miss Isadore M. Caughey.
  Nova.--Miss Mary C. Phelps, Ph.B.
  Oberlin.--Miss Grace H. Ashley, Miss Elizabeth Cheney, Miss Ella Louise
    Cheney, Mrs. Alice Davis, Mrs. E. R. Dorsett, Prof. T. S. Inborden,
    Mrs. S. J. E. Inborden, Miss Corrie N. Johnson, Miss Mabel M. Jones,
    Miss Julia E. McMillan, Mrs. Lucy M. Mellen, Miss Anna S. Mueller,
    Miss Nellie I. Reed, Miss Edith M. Thatcher, Prof. F. T. Waters,
    A.M.
  Painesville.--Rev. James Bond, Miss Nina E. Mosher, Miss Belle M.
    Whelpley.
  Parkman.--Miss Clara A. Dole.
  Richfield.--Rev. Warren E. Wheeler, Mrs. Kate L. Wheeler.
  Rock Creek.--Miss Florence A. Sperry, Miss Mabel A. Wightman.
  Ross.--Mrs. Martha H. Griffiths.
  Springfield.--Miss Clara S. Boyd.
  Tallmadge.--Miss Esther A. Barnes.
  Wakeman.--Mrs. S. A. Hayes.
  Zanesville.--Miss Louisa T. Black, M.D., Miss M. Elizabeth Messick.


INDIANA.

  Hammond.--Miss Emma J. Rosecrans.


ILLINOIS.

  Chicago.--Miss M. Nettie Crump, Rev. A. C. Garner, Mrs. A. C. Garner,
    Mr. William M. Griffiths, Miss Elizabeth Kehoe, Prof. A. D. Luethi,
    Rev. R. K. Stetson.
  Danville.--Miss Frances L. Yeomans.
  Downer's Grove.--Mr. O. R. Brown, Mrs. O. R. Brown.
  Elmhurst.--Miss Emma F. King.
  Jacksonville.--Miss Mary P. Roberts, B.L.
  Neponset.--Miss Mary T. Richardson, B.A.
  Oneida.--Miss Amelia L. Ferris.
  Princeton.--Miss Carrie E. Hodgman, Miss Margaret E. Reed.
  Yorkville.--Miss E. J. Lane.


MICHIGAN.

  Adrian.--Miss Julia A. Condict.
  Ann Arbor.--Miss Emily P. Jones.
  Battle Creek.--Miss Edith M. Robinson.
  Buchanan.--Miss Mary W. Culver.
  Charlotte.--Miss H. E. White, L.B.
  Detroit.--Miss Carlotta B. Leonard, Rev. W. Mitchell, Rev. J. M.
    Robinson, Mrs. J. M. Robinson.
  Escanaba.--Miss Jean Rodger.
  Frankfort.--Miss Ella M. Andrews, Miss Hattie M. Fairchild.
  Greenville.--Miss Nellie B. de Spelder.
  Kalamazoo.--Miss C. M. Dox, Miss May Belle Nicholson, Miss Luella Waring.
  Lansing.--Miss Jennie Fyfe, Miss Alice A. Holmes.
  Monroe.--Miss Ada Louise Wilcox.
  Olivet.--Miss Mary R. Bryant, A. M., Miss Susan I. Estabrook, Miss Marie
    D. Holzinger.
  Orion.--Mr. Fred R. Bush, A.B.
  Paw Paw.--Miss Alice Harvey.
  Salem.--Miss N. S. Dennis.
  Union City.--Miss E. A. Buell, Miss Lula M. Palmer, Miss Lillian L.
    Warner.
  Wayne.--Miss Mabel Egeler.


IOWA.

  Belle Plaine.--Miss Lizzie Stapleton.
  Belmont.--Miss Susan Sands, A.B.
  Keokuk.--Miss Mary C. Collins.
  Marathon.--Miss Laura Humphries.
  Nashua.--Miss Nellie J. Arnott.
  Nevada.--Miss Fannie E. Curtiss.
  Rockford.--Miss Jessie B. Lyon, Miss B. R. Parmenter.
  Troy.--Miss Harriet M. Smith.
  Vincennes.--Miss L. C. Holman.
  Waterloo.--Miss I. Ola Akin.


MISSOURI.

  Kidder.--Miss Maria Myers.
  Montier.--Miss Louise B. Wright.
  Springfield.--Miss Mary E. Newton, Miss Elizabeth H. Plumb, B.S.
  Welston.--Mrs. Virginia C. Logie.
  Willow Springs.--Miss Hattie J. Lovewell.


WISCONSIN.

  Acorn.--Miss Mary E. Brereton.
  Columbus.--Miss Martha J. Adams.
  Hartland.--Miss Mary E. Simonds.
  Ladoga.--Miss Myra J. Lamb.
  Madison.--Miss Lillian J. Beecroft.
  Pine River.--Miss Mary B. Spencer.
  Prairie du Sac.--Miss Mary J. Oertel, B.S.
  Wauwatosa.--Miss Annie Willerton.
  Whitewater.--Miss Ella A. Hamilton, Miss M. A. Kinney, Prof. Andrew J.
    Steele, A.M.


KANSAS.

  Bavaria.--Miss Susan A. Cooley.
  Topeka.--Miss Susa H. Breck, Rev. E. W. Hollies, Mrs. S. Hollies, Miss
    Minnie A. Hollies, Mrs. H. I. Miller.


MINNESOTA.

  Benson.--Miss M. E. Wilcox, Miss Mabel Wilcox.
  Clearwater.--Prof. H. E. Sargent, Mrs. H. E. Sargent.
  Mazeppa.--Miss Mary D. Hyde.
  Minneapolis.--Miss Mary A. Bye, B.S., Miss Lillian S. Cathcart.
  Montevideo.--Miss L. L. Goar.
  St. Paul.--Miss Nellie F. Comings.


NEBRASKA.

  Madison.--Miss Jeanne Forney.
  Neligh.--Miss Mary L. Nichol.
  Omaha.--Mrs. A. E. Foote.
  Santee Agency.--Mr. Eli Abraham, Mrs. E. J. Black, Rev. Artemas Ehnamani,
    Rev. Francis Frazier, Mrs. Maggie Frazier, Rev. James Garvie, Mr.
    William H. Hamlin, Mrs. William H. Hamlin, Charles R. Lawson, Mrs.
    Charles R. Lawson, Miss Mary Morris, Rev. A. L. Riggs, D.D., Mrs. A.
    L. Riggs, Mr. F. B. Riggs, Mr. Homer L. Stone, Mrs. Homer L. Stone,
    Miss Susan Wambdisun, Mr. Iver P. Wold, Mrs. Iver P. Wold, Miss Ella
    Worden, Mr. Robert Y. Gray.


NORTH DAKOTA.

  Cannon Ball.--Mr. Arthur Tibbetts.
  Elbow Woods.--Mr. C. W. Hoffman.
  Fort Berthold.--Rev. C. L. Hall, Mrs. S. W. Hall.


SOUTH DAKOTA.

  Collamer.--Rev. Edwin Phelps, Mrs. Ellen Phelps.
  Dell Rapids.--Miss Mary W. Bryant, A.B.
  Fort Pierre.--Mr. Solomon B. Yellow-Hawk, Mrs. Josephine Yellow-Hawk.
  Grand River.--Mr. David Many-Buffalo, Mrs. Martha Many-Buffalo, Mr.
    Huntington Wakutemani, Mrs. Louisa Wakutemani.
  Huron.--Miss Estelle Bloodgood.
  Lebanon.--Miss A. B. Chalfant.
  Leslie.--Mr. Justin Black-Eagle, Mr. Ansel Chapin, Mrs. Mary Chapin,
    Mr. Clarence Ward, Mrs. Estelle Ward, Mr. Daniel White-Thunder,
    Mrs. Elida White-Thunder.
  Moreau River.--Mr. Daniel Yawa, Mrs. Mary Yawa.
  Oahe.--Mr. Elias Jacobson, Miss E. Jean Kennedy, Mr. David Lee, Rev.
    T. L. Riggs, Mrs. T. L. Riggs, Mr. Stephen Yellow-Hawk.
  Rosebud Agency.--Rev. James F. Cross, Mrs. Stella P. Cross, Mr. Lot
    Frazier, Mrs. Rebecca Frazier.
  Sisseton Agency.--Mr. John Bluecloud, Mrs. Nora Bluecloud, Mr. Elias
    Gilbert, Mrs. Mary Gilbert, Mr. Simon Kirk, Mrs. Julia Kirk.
  Templeton.--Miss A. Z. Powell.
  Yankton.--Miss Jennie M. Lind.


MONTANA.

  Crow Agency.--Rev. J. G. Burgess, Mrs. J. G. Burgess.


COLORADO.

  Denver.--Rev. A. T. Burnell, Ph.D., Mrs. Mary A. Burnell, B.L.


WASHINGTON.

  Seattle.--Miss Nellie D. Sheldon.
  Union City.--Rev. Myron Eells, D.D.


UTAH.

  Salt Lake City.--Mrs. Marcus E. Jones.


CALIFORNIA.

  Fresno.--Mrs. J. H. Collins.
  Los Angeles.--Miss Dorothea Lummis, M.D., Mrs. C. V. Rice, Loo Ying.
  Marysville.--Miss Mattie A. Flint, Chung Moi.
  Oakland.--Mrs H. E. Hibbard.
  Oroville.--Miss Blanche Reece, Quong Leong.
  Riverside.--Miss Helen Webber.
  Sacramento.--Mrs. S. E. Carrington, Miss Fanny J. Webster.
  San Bernardino.--Mrs. Laura A. Curtis.
  San Diego.--Mrs. E. M. Stetson, Hom Goon.
  San Francisco.--Mrs. M. A. Green, Mrs. R. E. Lamont, Miss V. W. Lamont,
    Miss J. G. Morrison, Miss Olive Patten, Rev. W. C. Pond, D.D., Rev.
    Jee Gam, Yip Bow.
  Santa Barbara.--Mr. Eli Kimberly.
  Santa Cruz.--Mrs. Kate V. Hall, Pon G. Fang.
  Ventura.--Miss Alma Bradley, Mrs S. West.
  Vernondale.--Miss Ella Thomson.
  Watsonville.--Mrs Martha Ellis, Joe Dun.


TENNESSEE.

  Bailey.--Miss Mary E. Johnson.
  Bon Air.--Rev. E. N. Goff, Miss Viola Young.
  Chattanooga.--Rev. J. E. Smith.
  Cumberland Gap.--Rev. A. A. Myers, Mrs. A. A. Myers.
  Deer Lodge.--Rev. George Lusty.
  Grand View.--Mrs. Carrie Ferree, Miss G. D. Huntington, Miss Mary L.
    Jewett, Miss Maud Taylor.
  Greenville.--Miss M. M. Jackson.
  Harriman.--Miss Minnie Ferree, Rev. C. B. Riggs, Mr. Gilbert Walton.
  Hudsonburg.--Miss F. A. Jackson.
  Jackson.--Rev. Thomas J. Austin.
  Jellico.--Miss Bertha Davis, Miss Kenada, Rev. L. C. Partridge.
  Jonesboro'.--Miss Cordy Bayless.
  Knoxville.--Mrs. Minnie L. Crosthwait.
  Long View.--Miss L. J. Blackmore.
  Memphis.--Miss Rose Bigelow, Miss Laura Dickerson, Miss Emma O. Kennedy,
    Miss Cornelia E. Lewis, Miss Charlotte Rivers, Miss Etta V. Stone, Mr.
    Elias S. Webb.
  Mill Creek.--Rev. M. N. Sumner.
  Nashville.--Miss Anna T. Ballantine, Miss Mary E. Chamberlin, Rev. F. A.
    Chase, A.M., Rev. E. M. Cravath, D.D., Rev. Charles W. Dunn, Rev.
    Eugene Harris, A.M., B.D., Rev. J. E. Moorland, Rev. George W.
    Moore, Prof. Helen C. Morgan, A.M., Rev. H. H. Proctor, Miss Jennie
    A. Robinson, Rev. E. E. Scott, Rev. A. K. Spence, A.M., Miss Mary A.
    Spence, M.A., Rev. E. C. Stickel, A.M., Mrs. Luretta C. Stickel,
    B.L., Mr. L. J. Watkins, Miss Elnora Winter, Prof. H. H. Wright,
    A.M.
  Pine Bluff.--Mr. Charles R. Blanks.
  Pleasant Hill.--Miss Emma F. Dodge.
  Pomona.--Mrs. A. E. Graves, Rev. H. E. Partridge.
  Pulaski.--Prof. Jas. L. Murray, Mrs. Jas. L. Murray.
  Tracy City.--Rev. M. J. Smith.


KENTUCKY.

  Berea.--Rev. George Ames.
  Campton.--Rev. J. W. Doane.
  Combs.--Rev. Mason Jones.
  Corbin.--Rev. C. W. Green.
  Evarts.--Rev. Herbert Carleton, A.M., Miss L. Middleton.
  Lexington.--Rev. J. S. Jackson.
  Somerset.--Miss Ruth P. Harvey.
  Whetstone.--Rev. J. B. Cobble.
  Williamsburg.--Mr. James Higginbotham, Miss Nora Hill, Rev. W. G.
    Olinger, Prof. Charles M. Stevens, Rev. Samuel Sutton.


VIRGINIA.

  Cappahosic.--Mr. James H. Lockley, Mr. Robert L. White, Mr. David D.
    Weaver, Prof. W. B. Weaver, Mrs. Anna B. Weaver.
  Gloucester.--Miss Lucy C. Wyatt.


NORTH CAROLINA.

  Beaufort.--Rev. J. P. Sims.
  Brevard.--Rev. W. A. Hamet.
  Carter's Mills.--Rev. S. A. Stanford.
  Chapel Hill.--Rev. Paul L. La Cour, Mrs. Paul L. La Cour.
  Charlotte.--Rev. A. L. De Mond, Rev. Geo. H. Haines.
  Dry Creek.--Rev. W. D. Newkirk.
  Dudley.--Rev. S. P. Smith.
  High Point.--Rev. E. W. Stratton.
  Little's Mills.--Rev. Geo. R. Morris.
  Manly.--Prof. Geo. A. Woodard.
  McLeansville.--Rev. H. Dillard, Rev. S. S. Sevier, Mrs. S. S. Sevier.
  Moncure.--Rev. J. E. McNeill.
  Nalls.--Mr. B. H. Saunders.
  Oaks.--Miss A. E. Farrington, Rev. Anthony Peden.
  Pekin.--Miss Malsie D. Green.
  Raleigh.--Rev. A. W. Curtis, D.D., Mr. Wm. R. Hall.
  Sanford.--Rev. Henry Williams.
  Strieby.--Rev. Z Simmons.
  Swepsonville.--Miss Fannie Forest.
  Troy.--Rev. O. Faduma, Mrs. O. Faduma.
  Wilmington.--Rev. F. G. Ragland.
  Whittier.--Rev. Joseph Cadwallader, Rev. Robert Humphrey, Mrs. Olive A.
    Humphrey.


SOUTH CAROLINA.

  Charleston.--Miss Esther F. Alston Miss Marion R. Birnie, Miss Mary L.
    Deas, Miss Anna S. Gibbes, Mr. Edward A. Lawrence, Miss Anna R.
    Magrath, Mr. Isadore Martin, Rev. George C. Rowe, Miss Carrie E.
    Steele.
  Columbia.--Mr. Jefferson Miles, Rev. E. H. Wilson.
  Newberry.--Rev. J. H. Stannard.


GEORGIA.

  Albany.--Miss Katherine C. Dowdell.
  Athens.--Miss Mattie J. Brydie, Prof. L. S. Clark, A.M., Rev. C. S.
    Haynes, M.D., Miss Emma S. Morton, Miss A. M. Nicholson, Miss Eliza B.
    Twiggs.
  Atlanta.--Rev. George V. Clark.
  Bainbridge.--Mr. A. W. Bowman.
  Cuthbert.--Mr. F. H. Henderson, Mrs. F. H. Henderson.
  Garfield.--Mr. H. H. Williams.
  Hagan.--Rev. J. B. Fletcher, Mr. W. K. Kennedy.
  Macon.--Miss Ella N. Barksdale, Miss L. C. Haynes, Rev. J. R. McLean, Mr.
    John Orr.
  McIntosh.--Rev. R. B. Johns.
  Marietta.--Rev. Calvin Lane.
  Marshallville.--Mrs. A. W. Richardson.
  Savannah.--Rev. Wilson Callen, Mr. J. Loyd, Rev. L. B. Maxwell, Rev.
    J. H. H. Sengstacke.
  Stanfordville.--Prof. Charles W. Driskell, B.S., Mrs. Charles W.
    Driskell.
  Thomasville.--Mr. H. C. Sargent, Rev. F. W. Sims.
  Tobesofkee.--Rev. H. T. Johnson, Mrs. E. L. Johnson.


FLORIDA.

  Ocala.--Miss Amanda F. Moore.
  Orange Park.--Miss A. Margaret Ball, Miss Carrie W. Parrott.
  Tangerine.--Miss Susie T. Cathcart.


ALABAMA.

  Anniston.--Rev. James Brown.
  Athens.--Rev. M. S. Jones, Miss Ella May Thomason, Mrs. L. H. Williams.
  Blocton.--Rev. D. M. Lewis.
  Brewton.--Rev. J. J. Scott.
  Florence.--Miss Mary Lucy Corpier, Rev. William L. Johnson.
  Ironaton.--Rev. P. O. Wailes.
  Marion.--Miss Mary S. Larkin, Rev. William J. Larkin, Mrs. Sophia Larkin,
    Miss Lucy W. Parker.
  Selma.--Rev. T. J. Bell, Mrs. Mary A. Dillard, Prof. James A. Merriman.
  Shelby.--Rev. A. Simmons.
  Talladega.--Rev. George W. Andrews, D.D., Rev. M. L. Baldwin, Mr. Edgar
    A. Bishop, B.S., Rev. H. S. De Forest, D.D., Miss Mary R. De Forest,
    Rev. J. I. Donaldson, Rev. J. B. Grant, Rev. W. P. Hamilton, Prof.
    William E. Hutchison, Rev. R. W. Jackson, Rev. J. A. Jones, Rev. R.
    J. McCann, Prof. Edwin C. Silsby, Miss Louie Savery, Rev. J. R.
    Sims, Rev. Y. B. Sims, Rev. Spencer Snell, Mr. George Williamson.


MISSISSIPPI.

  Columbus.--Mrs. M. A. F. Tapley.
  Jackson.--Miss Mary Jane Gibson.
  Meridian.--Rev. C. L. Harris.
  Mound Bayou.--Mr. Isaiah T. Montgomery, Miss Mary V. Montgomery.
  Summit.--Miss Sarah Jane Thomas.
  Tougaloo.--Rev. Frank G. Woodworth, D.D., Mrs. N. E. Woodworth.
  Vicksburg.--Mrs. Sallie P. Dozier.


LOUISIANA.

  Abbeville.--Rev. J. A. Herod.
  Belle Place.--Rev. M. W. Whitt.
  Hammond.--Rev. H. B. Bortel.
  Lockport.--Rev. Charles Sands.
  New Orleans.--Rev. C. H. Claiborne, Mr. James D. Gordon, Rev I. H. Hall,
    Rev. Cornelius W. Johnson, Miss Deborah B. Johnson, Mr. Emerson C.
    Rose, Rev. J. E. Smith, Rev. John W. Whittaker.
  Schriever.--Rev. William Brown.
  St. Sophie.--Rev. C. W. Johnson.


TEXAS.

  Dallas.--Rev. E. E. Sims, Mrs. E. E. Sims.
  Helena.--Rev. Mitchell Thompson.
  Paris.--Rev. R. H. Henson.


NEW BRUNSWICK.

  Ashland.--Miss Georgia M. Belyea.
  Milltown.--Miss Frances M. Andrews.


CANADA.

  Springfield, Ont.--Miss Emma J. Bryce.
  Toronto.--Miss Bessie C. Bechan. Miss Belle F. Burr.


ENGLAND.

  Barrow-in-Furness.--Rev. James Wharton.


SCOTLAND.

  Dundee.--Miss Annie R. Creighton.




RECEIPTS FOR DECEMBER, 1895.


_THE DANIEL HAND FUND_

_For the Education of Colored People._

  Income for December                              $2,730.00
  Previously acknowledged                          16,460.00
                                                  ----------
                                                  $19,190.00
                                                  ==========


ENDOWMENT FUND.

  Estate of Daniel Hand, by Wilbur F. Day, Ex.
    Securities received, face value              $305,025.00


CURRENT RECEIPTS.


MAINE, $223.86.

  Andover. ----, _for Freight to Blowing Rock, N. C._               1.00
  Augusta. S. S. Class of Boys, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._     9.00
  Brewer. First Cong. Ch., 14; Sab. Sch., First Cong. Ch., 15      29.00
  Castine. Rainbow Band, _for McIntosh, Ga._                        2.00
  Eastport. S. S. Class Cong. Ch., 2; Harold and Leon Reynolds,
    1; _for Student Aid, Dorchester Acad._                          3.00
  Ellsworth. Cong. Ch.                                             41.67
  Farmington. Y. P. S. C. E., Bbl. of Bedding, etc., 2,
    _for Freight, for Talladega C._                                 2.00
  Gray. Cong. Ch.                                                   7.14
  Limerick. Cong. Ch.                                               5.00
  Litchfield. ----, _for Freight to Blowing Rock, N. C._            1.50
  Machias. Cong. Ch., _for Freight to Blowing Rock, N. C._,
    and to _Andersonville, Ga._                                     4.00
  Portland. "A Christmas Gift," 10; Maine Woman's Indian Assn.,
    by Miss J. L. Crie, 5                                          15.00
  Portland. Ladies of Williston Ch., Bbl. C. and Dishes,
    _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Rockland. W. M. Soc., Bbl. of Bedding, etc., 2.08
    _for Freight, for Talladega C._                                 2.08
  South Freeport. Cong. Ch.                                        14.00
  Thomaston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                     5.00
  Vinal Haven. King's Daughters, by C. E. Leadbetter,
    _for Student Aid, Dorchester Acad._                             5.00
  Wilton. Cong. Ch.                                                 8.50
  Windham. Cong. Ch.                                                8.15
  Yarmouth. First Parish S. S., Miss E. F. Snow S. S. Class,
    1.69; Mrs. E. E. McKinley S. S. Class, 60c., _for Indian
    M., Fort Berthold, N. D._                                       2.29
  York. First Cong. Ch.                                             5.03

  Woman's Aid to A. M. A., by Mrs. Ida V. Woodbury Treas.,
    _for Woman's Work_:
      Somerset Conf. Coll.                         3.00
      Limerick                                     0.50
                                                  -----             3.50
                                                                 -------
                                                                 $173.86
                                                                 -------

  ESTATE.

  Gorham. Estate of Rev. Joseph Bartlett, by John A.
    Waterman, Administrator                                        50.00
                                                                 -------
                                                                 $223.86


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $725.49.

  Acworth. Jr. C. E. Soc., _for Blowing Rock, N. C._                5.00
  Acworth. Bbl. Books, 2 Bbls. C., _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Alstead Center. Ladies' M. Soc., Pkg. C., _for Tougaloo U._
  Alstead Center. L. M. Soc., Bbl. Bedding and Patchwork,
    _for Talladega C._
  Bennington. C. E. Soc. of Cong. Ch.                               1.00
  Bethlehem. Cong. Ch., Stereop. Coll.                              5.00
  Candia. John P. French                                          100.00
  Chester. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Freight to Blowing Rock,
    N. C._                                                          1.25
  Colebrook. Dea. E. C. Wilder                                      1.50
  Concord. "A Friend," 30, _for a L. M._; "A Friend," 5            35.00
  Concord. First Cong. Ch., Box C., _for Andersonville, Ga._
  Dunbarton. Cong. Ch., Stereop. Coll.                              3.50
  Durham. Cong. Ch.                                                64.89
  Francestown. Cong. Ch.                                            9.00
  Gilsum. Cong. Ch.                                                 4.00
  Goffstown. E. M. Hadley                                           5.00
  Haverhill. Cong. Ch., Stereop. Coll.                              2.40
  Keene. Miss M. A. Wheeler, to const. GEORGE S. WHEELER, L. M.    30.00
  Keene. Mrs. DeBevoise's S. S. Class Sec. Cong. Ch., _for
    McIntosh, Ga._                                                 15.00
  Kingston. Cong. Ch.                                               4.75
  Manchester. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for S. S. Work, McIntosh,
    Ga._                                                           33.25
  Meriden. Bbl. C., _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Nashua. First Ch.                                                50.00
  Newport. Y. P. S. C. E. by Geo. P. Dudley, Treas., _for
    Church Building, Ga._                                          32.00
  North Hampton. "Two Members Cong. Ch."                           35.00
  North Weare. S. E. Soc., by Rebecca W. Madison, _for Central
    Ch., New Orleans, La._                                          2.00
  Raymond. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                      10.00
  Salem. Cong. Ch.                                                  3.00
  Seabrook and Hampton Falls. Cong. Ch.                            21.00
  Webster. Ladies' Aid Soc. Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., Freight prepaid,
    _for Williamsburg Acad., Ky._
  West Manchester. South Main St. Cong. Ch.                        16.95

  New Hampshire Female Cent. Inst. and Home Missionary Union,
    Miss Anne A. McFarland, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Chester Mission Circle                       5.00
      Concord. Cent. Union of First Ch.          200.00
      Hopkinton. "A Friend."                       5.00
      Tamworth. A Christmas Offering              25.00
                                                  -----           235.00


VERMONT, $466.54.

  Barnet. Cong. Ch.                                                34.00
  Bellows Falls. First Cong. Ch.                                   63.47
  Bennington. Miss H. D. Harwood's Class of Girls, Sab. Sch.
    First Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._                                4.00
  Burlington. Ladies of College St. Ch., 2.27 _for Student Aid_
    and 2.73 _for Freight for Dorchester Acad._                     5.00
  Chester. "A Friend," _for Indian M._                              2.00
  Coventry. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                     25.00
  Danville. Cong. Ch., Bedding, etc., _for Tillotson C._
  East Hardwick. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 28.80; Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.,
    29.60                                                          58.40
  Franklin. W. H. M. U., _for Freight to McIntosh, Ga._             1.00
  Groton. Mrs. B. A. Taft                                           5.00
  Guildhall. Cong. Ch., Stereop. Coll.                              5.96
  Hartford. Cong. Ch., adl.                                         2.25
  Jamaica. Cong. Ch., 6.75; Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., 5                 11.75
  Jericho Center. First Cong. Ch.                                  12.40
  Manchester. Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch., _for Knox Inst.,
    Athens, Ga._                                                   10.00
  North Craftsbury. Cong. Ch.                                       6.14
  Olcott. Extra Cent a Day Band of Cong. Ch.                       20.00
  Olcott. T. B. Parrott, Bbl. Apples, _for King's Mountain,
    N. C._
  Saint Johnsbury. South Cong. Ch.                                 30.13
  Saint Johnsbury. Arthur F. Stone, 2; Miss W. M. Glims, 50c.;
    Mrs. Moses Huntley, 25c., _for Tillotson C._                    2.75
  South Hero and Grand Isle. Cong. Ch.                              4.00
  Stockbridge. Rev. T. S. Hubbard                                  10.00
  Swanton. Cong. Ch.                                               11.47
  Wallingford. 2 Bbls. C. and Cash, 2, _for Moorhead, Miss._        2.00
  Waterbury. Cong. Ch.                                             10.73
  West Barnet. Y. P. S. C. W., by Marion Bole                       5.75
  West Brattleboro. Miss Maria E. Stedman, 10; "A Friend,"
    50c., _for Indian M._                                          10.50
  West Brattleboro. King's Sons                                     5.00
  Westfield. A. C. Hitchcock, _for Wilmington, N. C._               5.00
  Westminster. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  29.75
  Windham. Cong. Ch., 10; Sab. Sch., Cong. Ch., 2.09               12.09
  Wolcott. Cong. Ch.                                                2.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Vt., Mrs. Wm. P. Fairbanks,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Barnet. Jr. C. E., _for Indian Schp._        2.00
      Brattleboro West. L. B. S.                  10.00
      Coventry. "Busy Bees" Christmas Gift         5.00
      Proctor. Jr. C. E., _for Indian Schp._       5.00
      Saint Johnsbury. No. Ch. W. H. M. S.        25.00
      Waterbury. W. H. M. S.                      10.00
      Westminster West. Jr. C. E., _for
        Indian Schp._                              2.00
                                                  -----            59.00


MASSACHUSETTS, $4,802.94.

  Amesbury. Union Evan. Ch.                                        15.20
  Amesbury. Col. Y. M. C. A. Hall, 8.90; Col. by Robert H.
    King, 5.50, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va.              14.40
  Andover. Young Ladies' Soc. of Christian Workers, 20,
    _for Blowing Rock, N. C._; 20 _for Indian M._                  40.00
  Athol. Evan. Ch.                                                 66.86
  Barre. Ladies' H. M. Soc., Bbl. C., _for Greenwood, S. C._
  Belchertown. Cong. Ch., Stereopticon Coll.                        4.90
  Boston. Mount Vernon Ch.                       118.08
    Shawmut Cong. Ch., adl.                      101.00
    Benjamin F. Dewing, to const. MISS
      M. L. DEWING L. M.                          50.00
    Park St. Ch., adl.                            25.00
    Miss M. E. Thayer                             10.00
    W. L. Pierce, _for Gloucester Sch.,
      Cappahosic, Va._                             5.00
     South Boston. Phillips Cong. Ch.             33.75
     Brighton. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for
       Grand View, Tenn._                         15.00
     Dorchester. Rev. and Mrs. H. Houston,
       Bbl. C., Freight, 4, and 8, _for
       Student Aid, Dorchester Acad._             12.00
     Dorchester. Harvard Cong. Ch.                 7.00
     Dorchester. Dea. Thomas Knapp and
       S. S. Class, _for Wilmington, N. C._        8.00
     Dorchester Village. Sab. Sch. Cong.
       Ch., _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._   20.00
     Jamaica Plain. Central Cong. Ch., adl.       10.38
     Roxbury. Immanuel Cong. Ch.                 178.55
     Roxbury. Extra Cent a Day Band,
       Highland Ch.                               10.00
     Roxbury. Humane Soc., Pkg. _Literature
       for Tillotson C._
                                                  -----           603.76
  Bradford. "Friends," _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._       7.25
  Bridgewater. Central Sq. Cong. Ch.                               30.93
  Brimfield. Second Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., _for Meridian, Miss._
  Brockton. "Friends" First Cong. Ch.                               5.25
  Cambridgeport. Sab. Sch. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., _for Central Ch.,
    New Orleans, La._                                              10.00
  Cambridgeport. Jr. C. E. Soc. of Pilgrim Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                                           8.00
  Campello. Sab. Sch. South Ch., _for Williamsburg Acad., Ky._      8.22
  Chicopee Falls. Second Cong. Ch.                                 30.97
  Chiltonville. Cong. Ch.                                           1.00
  Cliftondale. Cong. Ch.                                           26.14
  Dalton. Mrs. Louisa F. Crane, _for Knox Inst., Athens, Ga._      10.00
  Danvers. Y. P. S. C. E., First Ch., _for Joppa, Ala._            10.00
  Dover. Cong. Ch.                                                  2.00
  Easthampton. Payson Cong. Ch. $147.52; First Cong. Ch. $44.96   192.48
  Easthampton. First Cong. Ch., _for Santee Indian M._             25.00
  Everett. First Bapt. Ch., _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic,
    Va._                                                           11.25
  Everett. "Y. E. T."                                               2.00
  Framingham. "A Friend," _for Indian Schp._                       17.50
  Framingham. S. S. Class, _for Williamsburg, Ky._                  4.00
  Franklin. Cong. Ch.              11.26
  Gilbertville. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._    50.00
  Globe Village. E. F. Ch.                                         24.86
  Granby. Cong. Ch., adl.                                           3.00
  Great Barrington. Mrs. Mary Atwood, Material for Sewing Class,
    Val. 1.50, _for Dorchester Acad._
  Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch.                                     34.25
  Groveland. Cong. Ch.                                             21.05
  Groton. Union Cong. Ch.                                          48.72
  Hadley. First Cong. Ch.                                           4.30
  Haverhill. West Cong. Ch.                                        30.00
  Haverhill. Unitarian Ch., First Parish, _for Gloucester Sch.,
    Cappahosic, Va._                                               16.13
  Haverhill. A. P. Nichols, _for Fort Berthold, N. D., Indian M._   5.00
  Haverhill. Ladies' Sew. Soc., Bbl. C., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._
  Holden. Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. C. and papers, _for Tougaloo U._
  Holliston. S. S. Class of Boys, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._   2.50
  Holyoke. The Ladies Prayer Circle, Sec. Cong. Ch., _for Central
    Ch., New Orleans, La._                                         20.00
  Huntington. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             9.60
  Hyde Park. First Cong. Ch.                                       39.05
  Hyde Park. "Friends," _for Student Aid, Talladega C._            20.00
  Lakeville. A Friend, _for Indian Schs._                           4.50
  Lancaster. Cong. Ch.                                             25.00
  Lenox. Cong. Ch.                                                 20.75
  Leverett. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               18.60
  Ludlow. First Cong. Ch.                                          12.18
  Ludlow Center. Cong. Ch., Stereopticon Coll.                      2.12
  Lynn. Central Cong. Ch.                                          13.60
  Lynnfield. Cong. Ch.                                             28.00
  Lyonsville. Mrs. P. B. Smith                                      5.00
  Malden. Mrs. R. P. Kemp, 50; First Bapt. Ch., 10.03; The
    Universalist Ch., 12.03; Saint Paul Episcopal Ch., 8.16;
    W. C. Burns, 5; Forest Dale Mission, 5, _for Gloucester
    Sch., Cappahosic, Va._                                         90.22
  Merrimac. First Cong. Ch.                                        25.00
  Methuen. First Parish Cong. Ch., adl.                            15.00
  Milford. Daniel Steward                                           1.00
  Millbury. First Cong. Ch.                                        36.46
  Millis. Church of Christ                                          7.00
  Mittineague. Cong. Ch.                                           22.20
  Mittineague. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Indian Educational
    Work_                                                          22.00
  Monson. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for McIntosh, Ga._                 20.00
  Newburyport. Prospect St. Cong. Ch., _for Model Cottage,
    Grand View, Tenn._ and to const. DR. C. C. DAY, L. M.          30.00
  Newton. Miss Cora C. Hood, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._        5.00
  Newton Centre. First Cong. Ch.                                   19.50
  North Amherst. Cong. Ch.                                         63.31
  North Amherst, Mrs. G. E. Fisher, 20; Whatsoever Soc., 15,
    _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                                     35.00
  North Amherst. Ladies' M. Soc., Bbl. C., _for Fisk U._
  North Amherst. Two Bbls. Apples, _for Marion, Ala._
  Northampton. Bbl. of Cloaks, _for Wilmington, N. C._
  Northampton. Mrs. J. S. Lathrop, _for Student Aid, Chandler
    Sch., Lexington, Ky._                                           2.00
  Northampton. Edwards Ch., King's Daughters, 2 Bbls. Christmas
    Presents, etc.; First Ch., Dorcas Soc., Box Christmas
    Presents, etc., _for Lexington, Ky._
  Norton. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                          15.85
  Raynham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                20.00
  Richmond. King's Daughters, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._           15.00
  Royalston. Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch., Box Papers, _for
    Tougaloo U._
  Salem. Crombie St. Cong. Ch.                                     62.50
  Salem. Tabernacle Ch. and Soc., to const. DANIEL A. SUTHERLAND,
    L. M.                                                          30.00
  Salem. Crombie St. Ch., 7; Crombie St. Ch. and S. S., 2 Bbl.
    C., _for Wilmington, N. C._                                     7.00
  Saxonville. Edwards Cong. Ch.                                    11.15
  Shelburne Falls. Cong. Ch., to const. MRS. ALSADA ELDREDGE,
    L. M.                                                          30.50
  Shirley Village. Ortho. Cong. Ch.                                15.00
  Southampton. Cong. Ch.                                           18.64
  South Hadley Falls. Cong. Ch.                                     7.00
  South Weymouth. Union Cong. Ch.                                  36.54
  South Weymouth. Mrs. Wm. Dyer, _for Student Aid, A. N. and I.
    Sch., Thomasville, Ga._                                        15.00
  Springfield. Olivet Cong. Sab. Sch., 17; Memorial Ch., 16.67;
    "A Grateful Christian," 10; St. John Ch., Stereopticon
    Col., 3                                                        46.67
  Springfield. Rev. B. Gilman, D.D., 20; K. D. of Ruth, Third
    Bapt. Ch., 3, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._           23.00
  Stockbridge. Cong. Ch.                                           12.06
  Stoneham. Cong. Ch., to const. MRS. E. L. RICHARDSON, L. M.      30.00
  Stoneham. By Mrs. Worthen, Half Bbl. C., _for McIntosh, Ga._
  Sunderland. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                  25.00
  Sutton. Ladies' Bbl. C., _for Tougaloo U._
  Tewksbury. Cong. Ch., Stereopticon Col.                           8.00
  Tewksbury. Ladies' Aid Soc. of Cong. Ch., _for Toliver, Ky._      5.00
  Three Rivers. Cong. Ch., Stereopticon Col.                       13.50
  Waypole. Second Cong. Ch.                                        17.00
  Ware. Jr. C. E. S., _for Indian M., Fort Berthold, N. D._        10.00
  Ware. Children, pennies contributed during the year, by L. A.
    Tucker, _for Indian M._                                         9.25
  Ware. Miss C. B. Cutler, "from her S. S. Class of little
    girls," _for Indian Schp._                                      3.00
  Ware. Miss Medora R. Howard, Bbl. C., Freight Paid, _for
    McIntosh, Ga._
  Ware. Sab. Sch. Class of Mrs. S. R. Sage, Bbl. C. and Bedding,
    _for Tougaloo U._
  Warren. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Student Aid, Dorchester Acad._, 8;
    L. B. Soc., Large Case and Box C., _for McIntosh, Ga._          8.00
  Wayland. Y. P. S. C. E., 4, and Bbl. C., _for Wilmington,
    N. C._                                                          4.00
  Wellesley Hills. Cong. Ch.                                       38.98
  Westboro. Ladies' Freedmen's Ass'n. _for Freight_                 2.00
  Westboro. Ladies' Freedmen's Ass'n. Bbl. C.; Y. L. B. Soc.,
    Box of C. and Christmas Presents, _for Saluda, N. C._
  West Boxford. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Box Sewing Material,
    _for Lexington, Ky._
  West Brookfield. Cong. Ch.                                        9.17
  Westfield. Second Cong. Ch.                                      28.84
  West Medway. Third Cong. Ch.                                      6.55
  West Newton. Second Cong. Soc.                                  170.00
  West Newton. Miss A. M. Hobbs, _for Gloucester Sch.,
    Cappahosic, Va._                                                5.00
  Weston. Town Hall Col., 17.52; Mrs. E. M. Knox, 5; Mr.
    Hastings, 5, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._            27.52
  West Somerville. Day St. Cong. Ch.                                9.00
  West Springfield. First Cong. Ch.                                12.50
  West Tisbury. First Cong. Ch.                                    10.93
  Williamstown. Ch. of Christ, in the White Oaks                    3.00
  Whitinsville. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 1,085.50; Estate of
    William H. Whitin, 200, by Edward Whitin; Sab. Sch. Cong.
    Ch., by  Arthur F. Whitin, Supt., 125                       1,410.50
  Worcester. Plymouth Cong. Ch. 74.98; Ladies of Plym. Ch.
    Aux., to const. MRS. MARY JANE WILDER L. M., 30.00            104.98
  Worcester. Plymouth Ch., Ladies' M. Aux., by Mrs. R. P.
   Beaman, _for Mountain Work_                                     20.00
  Worcester. S. S. Class No. 18, Plymouth Ch., 10.00, _for
    Student Aid, Ballard Inst., Macon, Ga._                        10.00
  Worcester. Logan, Swift and Brigham Env. Co., Case Envelopes,
    _for Straight U._
  Worcester. "Friends," 2 Bbls. C., _for Raleigh, N. C._

  Woman's Home Missionary Association of Mass. and R. I.,
    Miss Annie C. Bridgman, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      For Salaries of Teachers                   310.00
      "A Friend"                                  10.00
                                                  -----           320.00
                                                               ---------
                                                               $4,697.94

  ESTATES.

  Enfield. Estate of J. B. Woods, By Rev. Robert M.
    Woods, Trustee                                                 60.00
  Lawrence. Estate of Mrs. Maria Tenney Benson, by Mrs. Ada
    T. Brewster                                                    20.00
  Southampton. Estate of Miss Susan S. Edwards, by Rev.
    H. L. Edwards, Executor                                        25.00
                                                               ---------
                                                               $4,802.94

  CLOTHING, BOOKS, ETC., RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE.

  Chester, N. H. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., _for Blowing
    Rock, N. C._
  Mason, N. H. Ladies Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., _for Wilmington, N. C._
  Duxbury. Mrs. Almeda Ellison, Box C., _for Andersonville, Ga._
  Marshfield. King's Daughters, Bbl. C., _for Joppa, Ala._
  Roxbury. Eliot Ch., Mrs. B. F. Hamilton, Pkg. Toys, etc.,
    _for Remington Sta., So. Dak._
  Westboro. Ladies' Freedmen's Ass'n, 2 Bbls. C. _for Wilmington,
    N. C._, and _McIntosh, Ga._


RHODE ISLAND, $183.82

  Central Falls. Cong. Ch.                                         94.67
  Chepachet. Cong. Ch.                                              2.15
  East Providence. Newman Cong. Ch. to const. DR. ELMER E.
    MORSE, L. M.                                                   30.00
  Providence. Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch., _for Williamsburg
    Acad., Ky._                                                    15.00
  Providence. The Ministering Children, Central Cong. Ch., _for
    Student Aid, Talladega C._                                     15.00
  Providence. Central Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._                10.00
  Providence. Highland Chapel S. S. and Y. P. S. C. E., _for
    Indian M., Fort Berthold, N. D._                               10.00
  Providence. Mrs. Sophia S. Doe, 5; Miss Mary Fields, 50c.;
    Mrs. O. H. Haywood, 50c.; N. O. Bowlby, 50c.; C. H. Harrod,
    50c.; _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._                    7.00
  Providence. Sab. Sch. Central Ch., Box Christmas Gifts, _for
    Raleigh, N. C._


CONNECTICUT, $3,740.24

  Andover. Cong. Ch.                                               10.00
  Berlin. Second Cong. Ch., 14.70; Jr. Y. P. S. C. E., _for
    Tougaloo U._ 1.00                                              15.70
  Black Rock. Cong. Ch.                                            20.37
  Bloomfield. Cong. Ch.                                             2.85
  Branford. Cong. Ch. and Y. P. S. C. E., _for Central Ch., New
    Orleans, La._                                                   5.00
  Branford. Bbl. Bedding, etc. _for Talladega C._
  Bridgeport. Park St. Cong. Ch. to const. S. R. PRIEST, and
    MRS. DAVID WOOSTER, L. M.                                      81.40
  Bridgeport. Gleaners' Circle, Park Cong. Ch., _for Student
    Aid, Williamsburg Acad., Ky._                                   9.00
  Bridgeport. Y. P. S. C. E. and L. A. Soc., 2 Boxes C., _for
    Greenwood, S. C._
  Broad Brook. Cong. Ch.                                           11.08
  Brookfield. Cong. Ch.                                            18.87
  Canterbury. First Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_                 13.00
  Cheshire. "A Friend"                                              1.00
  Chester. Primary Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Central Ch., New
    Orleans, La._                                                   5.00
  Clinton. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_                10.00
  Colchester. Mrs. C. B. McCall, _for Santee Indian Sch._, 5.00;
    Mrs. Ely Gillette, 5.00                                        10.00
  Columbus. Cong. Ch.                                              17.86
  Danielsonville. Cong. Jr. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Central Ch.,
    New Orleans, La._                                               5.00
  East Haven. Y. P. S. C. E., by Miss Lottie E. Street, _for
    Central Ch., New Orleans, La._                                 25.00
  East Wallingford. Mrs. Benj. Hall                                 4.50
  East Windsor. First Cong. Ch., in part                           11.50
  Granby. South Cong. Ch.                                           5.00
  Griswold. First Cong. Ch.                                        11.00
  Haddam. Cong. Ch., adl.                                          18.41
  Hadlyme. Cong. Ch.                                                7.92
  Hartford. Pearl St. Cong. Ch., 77.08; "S. C. D.," 60.00;
    Park Cong. Ch., 49.45; Windsor Ave. Cong. Ch., 31.45          217.98
  Hartford. "Friends," 12; Jewell Hall Col., 10.26; Rev. Dr.
    Moore, 2; M. Hersey, 2, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic,
    Va._                                                           26.26
  Hartford. First Ch., _for Wilmington, N. C._                      8.00
  Hartford. Henry C. Butler, _for Indian M._                        5.00
  Hebron. Y. P. S. C. E., by Inez H. Porter, Secy.                  2.00
  Higganum. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., to const. DANIEL BRAINARD L. M.   30.00
  Ivoryton. Mrs. J. E. Northrup, _for Wilmington, N. C._           10.00
  Litchfield. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                  20.00
  Lyme. J. S. Hall                                                 20.00
  Madison. Cong. Ch.                                                4.00
  Middletown. First. Ch.                                           28.24
  Mystic. Cong. Ch.                                                21.43
  New Britain. First. Ch. of Christ, bal. to const., MRS.
    ELLEN B. BOARDMAN, MISS MATTIE E. PECK, MISS BERTHA
    BANCROFT, ARTHUR C. BLAKE, CHAUNCEY B. ANDREWS and
    JAMES S. NORTH, L. M's                                        140.00
  New Britain. South Cong. Ch., to const. CHARLES W. MARSHALL,
    E. ALLEN MOORE and MISS LOTTIE B. BASSETT, L. M's              97.64
  New Haven. Dwight Place Ch.                                     138.25
  New Haven. Golden Links Soc., Dwight Place Ch., _for Student
    Aid, Fisk U._                                                  18.00
  New Haven. Emmanuel Bapt. Ch., _for Gloucester Sch.,
    Cappahosic, Va._                                                8.03
  New Haven. Mrs. J. H. Burton, Pkg. Mats and Cards, _for
    McIntosh, Ga._
  Norfolk. Mrs. Mary A. Curtiss                                     1.00
  Norwich. Park Cong. Ch.                                           5.00
  New London. Second Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. and Box C. and Christmas
    Gifts, _for Raleigh, N. C._
  Old Saybrook. Cong. Ch., Quar. Col.                              32.51
  Plainfield. Miss Sarah E. Francis, _for Student Aid, Normal
    Inst., Grand View, Tenn._                                      10.00
  Plymouth. Cong. Ch.                                              15.00
  Pomfret. Woman's Aux. First Cong. Ch., Bbl. Bedding, _for
    Talladega C._
  Putnam. Second Cong. Ch.                                         62.39
  Sound Beach. Pilgrim Cong. Ch. (1 of which _for Talladega
    C._)                                                           15.00
  Sound Beach. Jr. Y. P. S. C. E. of Pilgrim Cong. Ch., Bbl.
    Goods, _for King's Mountain, N. C._
  South Britain. Cong. Ch.                                         16.15
  South Glastonbury. Cong Ch. and Sab. Sch.                        14.52
  South Killingly. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               4.00
  South Norwalk. Cong. Ch.                                         88.11
  Southport. ----                                                  20.00
  Stamford. First Cong. Ch. Jr. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Central
    Ch., New Orleans, La._                                          5.00
  Stratford. Cong. Ch.                                             14.00
  Suffield. First Cong. Ch.                                        18.15
  Talcottville. Cong. Ch.                                          80.00
  Thompson. Cong. Ch.                                              21.98
  Torrington. First Cong. Ch.                                       5.42
  Waterbury. W. B. Soc. of Second Cong. Ch., _for A. N. and
    I. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._                                     25.00
  Waterbury. Miss C. B. Hill, _for Wilmington, N. C._               8.00
  Westchester. Cong. Ch.                                           11.45
  West Hartford. First Ch.                                         13.19
  Westville. Cong. Ch.                                             15.00
  Whitneyville. Dorcas Soc. Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. C., _for
    McIntosh, Ga._
  Windsor. First Cong. Ch.                                          5.00
  Wolcott. Cong. Ch.                                               10.00
  Woodstock. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              15.50

  Woman's Cong. Home Missionary Union of Conn., Mrs. W. W.
    Jacobs, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Canton Center. Aux.                         15.00
      Danbury. Y. L. M. S., _for Student
        Aid, Williamsburg Acad., Ky._              3.00
      Greenwich. Second Ch., Mrs. Hall's
        S. S. Class, _for Student Aid,
        Conn. Indl. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._        5.50
      Nangatuck. L. A. S., _for Student Aid,
        Grand View, Tenn._                       100.00
      Norfolk. Aux.                               15.00
      Plantsville. Ladies' Indl. Soc.             35.00
      West Hartford. W. H. M. Aux., _for
        Student Aid, Thomasville, Ga._             7.00
                                                  -----           180.50
                                                               ---------
                                                               $1,826.16

  ESTATES.

  New Britain. Estates of Cordelia Stanley and Sophia
    Stanley, by Mrs. Julia A. Loomis, Executrix                   546.58
  Norfolk. Estate of Mrs. Mary Langdon Porter, Fred E.
    Porter, Executor                                              947.50
  Rocky Hill. Estate of Rev. A. B. Smith, by Rev. Elijah
    Harmon, Executor                                              120.00
  West Hartford. Estate of Nancy S. Gaylord, F. H.
    Parker, Executor                                              300.00
                                                               ---------
                                                               $3,740.24


NEW YORK, $1,282.26.

  Alfred. Mrs. Ida F. Kenyon                                        5.00
  Batavia. Mrs. F. P. Rice, _for Moorhead, Miss._                   5.00
  Brockport. Intermediate Dept. State Nor. Sch., _for Marion,
    Ala._                                                           4.00
  Brooklyn. Lewis Av. Cong. Ch., _for Indian M., Oahe, S. D._      82.00
  Brooklyn. Sab. Sch. Clinton Av. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                                          50.00
  Brooklyn. South Cong. Ch.                                        41.04
  Brooklyn. South Cong. Ch., Mission Sab. Sch., _for Central
    Church, New Orleans, La._                                      25.00
  Brooklyn. Y. P. S. C. E., Ch. of the Pilgrims, 5; The Wallace
    Class, Ch. of the Pilgrims, 5, _for Deer Lodge, Tenn._         10.00
  Brooklyn. Y. P. S. C. E., New Eng. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                                   5.00
  Canandaigua. Bbl. and Box of C. and Table Supplies, _for Kings
    Mountain, N. C._
  Candor. Bbl. C., _for Moorhead, Miss._
  Castle. G. A. Davis                                               5.00
  Chataugay. Joseph Shaw                                            4.50
  Clifton Springs. ----, _for Kings Mountain, N. C._               10.00
  Corona. Rev. W. J. Peck, Pkg. Literature, _for Beach Inst._
  Coventryville. Children of S. S., _for Central Ch., New Orleans,
    La._                                                            5.00
  East Bloomfield. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Central Ch., New Orleans,
    La._                                                           19.75
  Elmira. Mrs. S. D. Jennings                                      10.00
  Honeoye. Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch., _for Central Ch., New
    Orleans, La._                                                  10.00
  Jamestown. C. E. Soc., by Mrs. S. A. Baldwin, bal. to const.
    MISS EMILY W. HOLMES L. M.                                     11.50
  Jefferson. Mrs. C. Nichols                                        5.00
  Le Roy. Miss D. A. Phillips                                       5.00
  Little Falls. Miss F. D. Emerson, _for Gloucester Sch.,
    Cappahosic, Va._                                                1.00
  Lockport. East Ave. Cong. Ch. Y. P. S. C. E.                      7.29
  Middletown. First Cong. Ch.                                      53.00
  Middletown. North St. Cong. Ch., _for Freight to Grand View,
    Tenn._                                                          5.00
  Mount Vernon. B. B. Adams                                         0.50
  Napoli. Ladies' H. M. Soc., Sab. Sch. Penny Col., _for McIntosh,
    Ga._                                                            4.00
  New York. W. E. Dodge, Educational Fund, _for Talladega C._     250.00
  New York. Miss Phebe Ann Thorn, 100; Mrs. I. S. Kennedy, 10,
    _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._                        110.00
  New York. Broadway Tabernacle Ch., Adl.                          95.00
  New York. Miss D. E. Emerson, _for A. G. Sch., Moorhead Miss._
    and to const. MISS E. L. PARSONS L. M.                         30.00
  New York. Rev. John B. Devin, _for Jonesboro, Tenn._              5.00
  New York. S. S. Class of Christ Cong. Ch., Mount Hope             5.00
  New York. Miss Grace H. Dodge, Pkg., Cards and Calendars,
    _for Beach Inst._
  Northfield. Union M. Soc., Cong. Ch.                             13.50
  North Hannibal. ----, _for Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga._             5.00
  Orient. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                      15.00
  Owego. Cong. Ch., Ladies' M. Soc., 10; Y. P. S. C. E. 10, Sab.
    Sch. Cong. Ch., 5, _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._         25.00
  Oxford. Cong. Y. P. S. C. E., 10; Jr. Y. P. S. C. E., 70c.,
    _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._                            10.70
  Pekin. Miss Oliva Root                                            1.00
  Poughkeepsie. L. M. Soc., Box of C., _for Williamsburg Acad.,
    Ky._
  Riverhead. Cong. Ch.                                             10.16
  Rushville. First Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. Potatoes, _for Greenwood,
    S. C._
  Sag Harbor. Charles N. Brown, to const. MISS VIRGINIA O. B.
    KEESE L. M.                                                    30.00
  Sidney. Cong. Ch.                                                13.25
  Sing Sing. Mrs. Cornelia E. Judd, 30; Mrs. Harriet M. Cole, 30,
    for L. M's                                                     60.00
  Syracuse. Y. P. S. C. E. Goodwill Ch., _for Central Ch., New
    Orleans, La._                                                   3.00
  Troy. Mrs. George Harrison, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic,
    Va._                                                           10.00
  Utica. Bethesda Welsh Cong. Ch.                                   5.00
  Warsaw. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., _for Wilmington, N. C._
  Westfield. Box of Bedding and Table Linen _for Storrs Sch.,
    Atlanta, Ga._
  Woodhaven. Goodwill Inst., First Cong. Ch., Box of Papers and
    Mags., _for Saluda, N. C._

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of N. Y., by Mrs. J. J. Pearsall,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Brooklyn. L. H. M. S.                       55.00
      Brooklyn. Ch. of the Pilgrims, W. H. M. S.  15.00
      Homer. S. S.                                 4.57
      Homer. Aux.                                 17.50
      Honeoye. Aux.                               12.00
      Ithaca. W. M. S.                            20.00
      Ithaca. W. M. S., _for Central Ch., N. O._  25.00
      New York. Broadway Tab. Soc. for W. W.       6.00
      Poughkeepsie. S. S. _for Central Ch.,
        N. O._                                    28.00
      Syracuse. W. M. S., 14; Geddes Ch.,
        Willing Workers, 5                        19.00
                                                  -----           202.07


NEW JERSEY, $441.45.

  Cinnaminson. Mrs. A. Lippincott, 5; Mrs. A. Wood, 5; Mrs. Wood,
    5; Miss Emily Harris, 1, _for Elbow Woods Chapel, N. D.,
    Indian M._                                                     16.00
  Haddonfield. Mr. and Mrs. B. M. Roads, 20; R. & S. Nicholson,
    6; John J. Glover, 5; _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._   31.00
  Jersey City. Mrs. Celia G. Dickinson, _for Tillotson C._         25.00
  Newark. First Cong. Ch. (of which Y. P. S. C. E., by Miss Emma
    A. Campfield, 10.)                                             44.25
  Newark. Mrs. Lucy I. Seymour, _for Indian M._                    10.00
  Newark. Belleville Av., Y. P. S. C. E., _for Central Ch., New
    Orleans, La._                                                   5.00
  Vineland. Jr. C. E. Soc., First Baptist Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                                   4.00
  Westfield. Cong. Ch.                                            220.00
  Westfield. Ladies' Soc., 2 Bbls. Bedding, _for Macon, Ga._
  Woodbridge. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Central Ch., New
    Orleans, La._                                                  21.20

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of the N. J. Ass'n, by Mrs. J. H.
    Denison, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Montclair. First Cong. Ch., W. H. M. Soc., _for Schp.
      Talladega C._                                                65.00


PENNSYLVANIA, $123.19.

  Coudersport. Mrs. Mary W. Mann                                    5.00
  Fallsington. Mrs. P. R. Burgess _for Gloucester Sch.,
    Cappahosic, Va._                                                1.00
  Germantown. Second Presb. Ch., 15; Box of Books, 3.75 for
    Freight, _for Blowing Rock, N. C._                             18.75
  Guy's Mills. Simeon O. Fitch                                      1.50
  Mount Carmel. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                 5.00
  Neath. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                        6.29
  Philadelphia. James Burson, _for Student Aid_, 5; "A Friend,"
    20, _for School Books_; "A Friend," 1, _for Blowing Rock,
    N. C._                                                         26.00
  Philadelphia. Mrs. C. A. Corlies, 10; Miss S. A. Robinson, 5;
    Miss Ann Fry, 5; C. H. Ross, 50c.; J. S. Truman, 39c., _for
    Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._                              20.80
  Philadelphia. Central Cong. Ch.                                   5.00
  Scranton. Sab. Sch. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                            8.76
  ----. Miss Sarah Newlin, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._  25.00


OHIO, $626.72.

  Akron. First Cong. Ch. to const. JOSEPH BALDWIN L. M.            30.87
  Bellevue. First Cong. Ch.                                         8.00
  Cincinnati. Miss Mary McEmery, _for Tillotson C._                10.00
  Cincinnati. Miss Dorothy Papenheimer, 2; Miss Maggie Portune,
    1.50, _for Tillotson C._                                        3.50
  Cincinnati. Columbia Cong. Ch.                                    7.26
  Claridon. A. A. WILMOT, 30, to const. himself L. M.; Cong.
    Soc., 14.35                                                    44.35
  Cleveland. Euclid Ave. Cong. Ch., 118.25; Plymouth Ch., 54.26;
    Archwood Ave. Cong. Ch., 8.05; R. J. Thomas, 4                184.56
  Cleveland. Hough Ave. Cong. Ch., _for Central Ch., New
    Orleans, La._                                                  10.97
  Cleveland. Pilgrim Ch., _for Central Ch., New Orleans, La._       5.50
  Elyria. First Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., _for Wilmington, N. C._
  Geneva. Cong. Ch.                                                20.00
  Lenox. Y. P. S. C. E., Cong. Ch.                                  5.00
  Marysville. Ladies of Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. C., _for
    Andersonville, Ga._
  Mount Vernon. First Cong. Ch.                                     60.00
  North Kingsville. Mrs. S. C. Kellogg, 5, _for Indian M._, and
    5 _for Beaufort, N. C._; Miss Eliza S. Comings, 5               15.00
  Norwalk. Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Burrell
    Sch., Selma, Ala._                                               7.00
  Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch.                                         51.72
  Oberlin. Y. P. S. C. E., First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                                    5.00
  Oberlin. L. A. Soc., Second Cong. Ch., Box and Bbl. Household
    Linen and C.; Mutual Benefit Soc., Bbl. C.; Roy S. Dorsett,
    Box C., _for Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Painesville. Cong. Ch., adl.                                       5.00
  Ruggles. Cong. Ch. to const. WILSON J. STURTEVANT L. M.           30.00
  Saybrook. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., Bbl. C., _for Marshallville, Ga._
  Strongsville. Cong. Ch. _for Alaska M._                            1.00
  Toledo. Central Cong. Ch., 40.25; Second Cong. Ch., 6; Harriet
    C. Flagg, 1                                                     47.25
  Wakeman. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                       21.24
  Wellington. Edward West                                           10.00
  West Richfield. Miss Eunice Alger, 10; Mrs. Esther R. Alger,
    2.50, _for Boys' New Hall, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                12.50

  Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. Geo. B.
    Brown, Treas.:
      Cleveland. Euclid Ave., _for Student Aid,
        Lincoln Acad., All Healing, N. C._        20.00
      Mount Vernon. S. S.                          5.00
      North Olmstead. W. M. S.                     5.00
      Rochester. "A Friend"                        1.00
                                                  -----            31.00


INDIANA, $6.00.

  Angola. Mrs. Quick and "Friends," Bbl. and Box dried Fruit
    and Carpeting _for King's Mountain, N. C._
  Terre Haute. M. P. Noyes                                          1.00

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Indiana, Mrs. A. H. Ball,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Indianapolis. Mayflower Ch.                                   5.00


ILLINOIS, $1,136.73.

  Abingdon. Cong. Ch.                                              25.34
  Alton. Mrs. I. D. Gilman, _for Student Aid, Gregory Inst._       10.00
  Belvidere. Cong. Ch.                                              5.00
  Chicago. "Cash," 100; Leavitt St. Ch., 6.84; First Cong.
    Ch., 101.02; New Eng. Cong. Ch., 91; South Cong. Ch., 60.62;
    to const. H. RUSSELL SMITH and E. L. BURCHARD, L. M's;
    "M. R.," 25; Rev. Henry Willard, 20; Mr. and Mrs. J. C.
    Kilner, 10; Brainerd Ch., 8.04; Union Park Ch., Mrs.
    G. S. F., 5; I. N. Camp, 3                                    430.52
  Chicago. Miss Emma Willard, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._      10.00
  Chicago. Mrs. A. Hulburd, _for Indian M., Independence,
    N. D._                                                          0.40
  Danville. C. M. Young, Sewing Machine _for Fisk U._               5.00
  Dover. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
  Galva. Cong. Ch.                                                 19.80
  Glencoe. Cong. Ch.                                               95.33
  Granville. "Cheerful Workers"                                    10.00
  La Grange. Cong. Ch.                                             22.54
  Lee Center. Cong. Ch., adl.                                       0.75
  Lowell. V. G. Lutz                                                2.00
  Moline. First Cong. Ch.                                          38.94
  Morrison. Miss Ellen S. Brown                                     1.00
  Oak Park. First Cong. Ch.                                       149.87
  Oak Park. Mrs. J. M. Baker, Box Brushes and Combs _for
    Blowing Rock, N. C._
  Payson. Cong. Ch.                                                21.78
  Peoria. Rev. A. A. Stevens                                        3.00
  Princeton. "A Friend," _for Tillotson C._                         1.00
  Princeton. W. M. Soc., Box and Bbl. Goods _for Straight U._
  Ridgeland. Y. P. S. C. E., 5; Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., 4.25           9.25
  Rock Falls. Ladies' M. Soc., Box Bedding _for Lexington, Ky._
  Rockford. First Cong. Ch.                                        78.74
  Sublette. Y. P. S. C. E., by Mrs. E. T. Leith, Treas., _for
    Santee Indian Sch._                                             2.25
  Toulon. Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch.                              10.00
  Wheaton. College Ch. of Christ                                   44.25
  Winnetka. First Cong. Ch., 44.65; Mrs. C. H. Dowd, 5             49.65

  Illinois Woman's Home Missionary Union, Mrs. L. A. Field,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Aurora. New Eng. Ch. Jr. C. E.              10.00
      Chicago. New England Ch. W. M. S.            5.00
      Elgin. W. M. S.                             10.00
      Evanston. W. M. S.                          15.07
      Oak Park. W. M. S.                          15.25
      Rantoul. W. M. S.                            5.00
      Rockford. Second Ch. W. M. S.               25.00
      Rockford. First Ch. W. M. S.                 5.00
                                                  -----            90.32


MICHIGAN, $855.97.

  Alpena. First Cong. Ch.                                          26.00
  Ann Arbor. First Cong. Ch.                                       42.75
  Canton. Geo. R. Woodworth                                         0.50
  Charlotte. First Cong. Ch.                                       10.00
  Charlotte. Carmel Cong. Ch., 5; Miss H. E. White, 1.75, _for
    Student Aid, Talladega C._                                      6.75
  Clinton. Cong. Ch., 8.79; Jr. C. E. Soc., by Thomas H.
    Warner, 2.50                                                   11.29
  Coloma. Cong. Ch.                                                 3.40
  Detroit. First Cong. Ch.                                         76.34
  Detroit. W. M. A. of First Cong. Ch., by Mrs. Helen A. Clark,
    from sale of Coins, the gift of Marie Kuchera, of Koniggratz,
    Eastern Bohemia                                                25.00
  Detroit. Y. P. S. C. E. of Fort St. Cong. Ch., Bbl. C.;
    Woodward Ave. Cong. Ch., Bbl. C. _for Greenwood, S. C._
  Dexter. Dennis Warner                                            10.00
  Grand Haven. First Cong. Ch.                                      4.10
  Greenville. Cong. Ch., 42.60; "A Friend," 5                      47.60
  Homestead. Y. P. S. C. E., By Mary A. Sill, Sec.                  1.63
  Kalamazoo. Sen. Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch.                       3.00
  Manchester. Cong. Ch.                                             1.00
  Nahma and Isabella. Cong. Chs.                                    1.50
  Olivet. W. C. T. U. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._    5.00
  Olivet. Box Books, etc., _for Lexington, Ky._
  Port Huron. First Cong. Ch.                                      39.36
  Romeo. Cong. Ch.                                                 10.75
  South Haven. S. S. Class Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                                   5.25
  Tecmuseh. James Vincent                                          10.00
  Traverse City. S. Anderson, Lot of S. S. Papers _for
    Talladega C._

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of Michigan, by Mrs. E. F.
    Grabill, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Addison. W. H. M. S.  0.35
      Benzonia. Y. P. C. S. E.                     3.00
      Greenville. Y. W. M. S.                      5.00
      Pinckney. Church Worker's Soc.               0.15
      Union City. W. H. M. S.                      6.25
                                                  -----            14.75
                                                                 -------
                                                                 $355.97

  ESTATE.

  Ann Arbor. Estate of Dr. Corydon Ford by Bryant Walker, Admr.   500.00
                                                                 -------
                                                                 $855.97


IOWA, $385.14.

  Algona. Mrs. H. E. Stacy, 13; Miss Clara Zahlton, 11, _for
    Student Aid, Fisk U._                                          24.00
  Belle Plaine. Cong. Ch.                                          13.00
  Cedar Rapids. Band Willing Workers, Box. C., etc., by Mrs.
    L. R. Munger, _for Beach Inst._
  Chester Center. Y. P. S. C. E., by J. W. Fisher, Clk.             3.87
  Des Moines. "A Friend," _for Wilmington, N. C._                  16.50
  Des Moines. Plym. Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. Material _for Sewing
    Room_; Plym. Rock Miss. Soc., Pkg. Hall Supplies _for
    Talladega C._
  Dunlap. Cong. Ch.                                                20.61
  Earlville Cong. Ch.                                              11.75
  Eldora. Mrs. Hardin, 1; Jr. E. Soc., 1, _for Student Aid,
    Fisk U._                                                        2.00
  Galt. Cong. Ch.                                                   3.40
  Grinnell. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., to const. MRS. ADDIE M.
    PRESTON L. M.                                                  30.00
  Independence. S. S. Class Cong. Ch., by Miss Grace Potwin,
    _for Student Aid, Beach Inst._                                  2.00
  Independence. Mrs. O. Potwin, Pkg. Cards and Pkg. Literature
    _for Beach Inst._
  Kingsley. Y. P. S. C. E., by Mrs. Carrie Snyder, _for Pleasant
    Hill Acad., Tenn._                                              2.00
  Lansing. Rev. A. Kern                                             2.00
  Le Grand. W. V. Craig                                             5.00
  Lincoln. Cong. Ch.                                                2.00
  McGregor. Cong. Ch.                                             111.31
  Montour. Cong. Ch.                                               17.50
  New Hampton. Y. P. S. C. E. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                                   5.00
  Oskaloosa. Cong. Ch.                                              2.00
  Red Oak. Cong. Ch.                                               20.00
  Rockford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                      8.75
  Sioux City. First Cong. Ch.                                      37.40
  Sloan. Bbl. of C. and Bedding _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._
  Postville. First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Meridian,
    Miss._                                                         10.00
  Waterloo. Miss Lucy Leavitt, _for Talladega C._                   7.00

  Iowa Woman's Home Missionary Union, Miss Belle L. Bentley,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Decorah. W. M. S.                            9.95
      Earville. W. M. S.                           5.00
      Lewis. Jr. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Schp. Beach
        Inst._                                     6.00
      Madison Co. First Ch., Mrs. I. W. Brownell   1.00
      Magnolia. W. M. S.                           1.25
      Westfield. Mission Band                      4.85
                                                  -----            28.05


WISCONSIN, $99.30.

  Beloit. First Cong. Ch., adl.                                    23.00
  Beloit. Miss Hobart, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._              1.50
  Darlington. Cong. Ch, 15; Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch., 15        30.00
  Evansville. Cong. Ch., adl.                                       3.00
  Janesville. First Cong. Ch.                                      24.00
  Madison. Pilgrim S. S., 2; Miss Beecroft, 1; Miss Hemwood,
    50c., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                           3.50
  Milwaukee. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                                     2.00
  Roberts. Cong. Ch.                                                8.30
  Whitewater. Jr. C. E. Soc. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, A. N.
    and I. Sch., Thomasville, Ga._                                  4.00


MINNESOTA, $139.76.

  Beaver Creek. Christian End. Soc., 6; Ellen R. Dorsett, 5.65,
    _for Blowing Rock, N. C._                                      11.65
  Detroit. First Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                            5.77
  Faribault. Cong. Ch., 3; Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., 5                   8.00
  Graceville. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Indian Hospital_            2.58
  Minneapolis. Wm. H. Norris, adl., 11; Silver Lake Ch., 5.80;
    Vine Cong. Ch., adl., 4.15                                     20.95
  New Richland. Mrs. E. E. Cram, _for Indian M., Independence,
    N. D._                                                          1.00
  New Ulm. Cong. Ch.                                               15.60
  Northfield. First Cong. Ch.                                      63.06
  Rochester. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                    2.35
  Saint Paul. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                                    8.80


MISSOURI, $72.40.

  Cameron. Mrs. Hiram Smith                                        50.00
  Cameron. Rev. D. E. Todd, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._          5.00
  Kidder. Cong. Ch.                                                 5.00
  Saint Joseph. Tabernacle C. E.                                    4.40
  Saint Louis. Harlem Immanuel Cong. Ch., 6.55; Ch. of the
    Redeemer, 1.45                                                  8.00


ARKANSAS, $4.00.

  Little Rock. First Cong. Ch.                                      4.00


KANSAS, $62.15.

  Lawrence. Mr. and Mrs. A. L. Goudy                                5.45
  Leavenworth. First Cong. Ch.                                     45.00
  Smith Center. First Cong. Ch.                                     3.00
  Stockton. Cong. Ch.                                               4.70
  Topeka. Ladies' First Cong. Ch., Bbl. Bedding _for Meridian,
    Miss._
  Wakefield. Cong. Ch.                                              4.00


NEBRASKA, $18.10.


  New Castle. Cong. Ch.                                             1.40
  Santee. Pilgrim Ch., by Elder Robinson                            2.00
  Steelburg. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                                    1.70
  York. First Cong. Ch.                                            13.00


NORTH DAKOTA, $161.68.

  Fort Berthold. S. W. and Rev. C. L. Hall, 100; Cong. Ch.
    and Sab. Sch., 29.18, _for Elbow Woods Chapel, N. D._;
    S. W. Hall, 30, _for Independence, N. D._                     159.18

  Woman's Home Missionary Union of North Dakota, by Mrs.
    Mary M. Fisher, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Cummings. "Christian Soldiers"               2.50


SOUTH DAKOTA, $98.55.

  Alexandria. "A Friend"                                            1.00
  Clark. Cong. Ch.                                                  1.55
  Saint Johns. Miss F. E. Hunnewell, _for Indian M._               30.00
  Yanktown. Cong. Ch.                                              66.00


COLORADO, $13.50.

  Denver. Miss Caroline Danielson, _for Indian M._                  1.00
  Greeley. Jr. Y. P. S. C. E., _for Indian Schp._                  10.00
  Otis. Cong. Ch.                                                   2.50


OKLAHOMA, $4.29.

  Guthrie. Plym. Ch.                                                4.29


UTAH, $5.00.

  Salt Lake City. Ladies' Miss'y Soc., Phillips Cong. Ch.,
    _for furnishing Chinese Mission Home, Salt Lake City_           5.00


CALIFORNIA, $127.93.

  Campbell. Cong. Ch.                                              16.10
  Haywards. "A Friend"                                             25.00
  Los Angeles. Mrs. C. C. Eddy                                      1.00
  Martinez. Mrs. J. M. Weeks                                        5.00
  Poway. Rev. H. C. Abernethy                                      50.00
  Ventura. First Cong. Ch.                                         22.00

  California Woman's Home Missionary Soc., by Mrs. J. M.
    Haven, Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Cal. W. H. M. Soc.                                            8.83


OREGON, $3.50.

  Forest Grove. First Cong. Ch.                                     3.50


WASHINGTON, $34.00.

  Garfield. Bertha M. Archer, _for Mountain Work_                   5.00
  Seattle. Miss Lily M. Guion, Sub. to "Golden Rule" _for
    Talladega C._
  Skokomish. Cong. Ch.                                              5.00
  Tacoma. East Ch., by Rev. A. J. Smith                             4.00

  Washington Woman's Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. C. E. George,
    Treas., _for Woman's Work_:
      Washington W. H. M. U.                                       20.00


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.

  Washington. Mary Buckman, Kindergarten Material _for Macon, Ga._


MARYLAND, $80.00.

  Baltimore. First Cong. Ch., 75; Second Cong. Ch., 5              80.00


VIRGINIA, $183.34.

  Freeshade. H. Matthews, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._    1.00
  Gloucester. Gloucester Educational Club, _for Gloucester Sch.,
    Cappahosic, Va._                                              140.00
  Gloucester. Gloucester Sab. Sch. Quarterly Convention, 28.89;
    Morning Glory Bap. Ch., 5; Bethel Ch., 4.20, _for Gloucester
    Sch., Cappahosic, Va._                                         38.09
  Mathews Co. Mr. and Mrs. B. W. Dabney, _for Gloucester Sch.,
    Cappahosic, Va._                                                1.25
  Sassafras. Mr. and Mrs. George Leigh, _for Gloucester Sch.,
    Cappahosic, Va._                                                2.00
  Roanes. James H. Brooks, _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._   1.00


KENTUCKY, $2.00.

  Red Ash. Cong. Ch.                                                2.00


TENNESSEE, $118.00.

  Grand View. W. H. Clark, Bbl. of Apples _for Andersonville,
    Ga._
  Memphis. Mr. and Mrs. J. S. Minken, _for Kindergarten,
    Memphis_                                                      100.00
  Memphis. Mrs. V. C. Logie, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._       10.00
  Nashville. C. E. Soc. of Fisk U., 4, _for Student Aid, New
    Orleans, La._; 4, _for Hospital, Fort Yates, N. D._             8.00


NORTH CAROLINA, $6.00.

  Blowing Rock. Pkg. Aprons and Holders, from unknown source.
  Raleigh. Cong. Ch.                                                6.00


GEORGIA, $43.55.

  Macon. E. H. Burrage, 9; Eva F. Chesley, 1.75; Clara A.
   Dole, 1.50, _for Student Aid, Ballard Inst., Macon, Ga._        12.25
  McIntosh. Harriet E. Leach, 10; Prof. Fred. W. Foster, 4;
    S. Josephine Scott, 3, _for Student Aid_; Janet Knowlton,
    6.30, for Books _for Dorchester Acad._                         23.30
  McIntosh. Cong. Ch.                                               7.00
  Woodville. Pilgrim Ch., 65c.; Rev. J. H. H. Sengstacke, 35c.      1.00


FLORIDA, $82.33.

  Fernandina. "A Friend"                                           75.00
  Melbourne. A few members Cong. Ch., by Mrs. A. O. M. Phillips     7.33


ALABAMA, $13.24.

  Athens. Trinity Cong. Ch.                                         2.20
  Blocton. Cong. Ch.                                                1.50
  Ironaton. Rev. P. O. Wailes                                       3.00
  Talladega. Rev. H. S. De Forest, D.D., _for Talladega C._         4.54
  Talladega. Miss F. A. Frew, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._       2.00


MISSISSIPPI, $26.75.

  Meridian. First Cong. Ch.                                         2.25
  Moorhead. Miss S. L. Emerson, _for Student Aid, A. G. Sch.,
    Moorhead_                                                      15.00
  Salem and Piney Grove. Churches                                   1.00
  Tougaloo. Mrs. L. M. Sisson, 5; Frank H. Ball, 2.50, _for
    Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                                       7.50
  Westside. Rev. B. S. Ousley                                       1.00


TEXAS, $8.00.

  Austin. "Texas Freeman" "Fort Worth Item" and "Rams Horn"
    _for Reading Room, Tillotson C._
  Palestine. First Cong. Ch.                                        8.00

                                                              ----------
  Donations                                                   $13,838.64
  Estates                                                       2,569.08
                                                              ----------
                                                              $16,407.72


INCOME, $2,690.00.

  Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                         907.25
  E. A. Brown, Schp. Fund, _for Talladega C._         15.75
  De Forest Fund, _for President's Chair, for
    Talladega C._                                    125.00
  Fisk University Theo. Fund                           1.12
  General Endowment Fund                              22.50
  Graves Schp. Fund, _for Talladega C._              125.00
  Hammond Fund, _for Straight U._                     93.75
  Hastings Schp. Fund, _for Atlanta U._                6.25
  Howard Theo. Fund, _for Howard U._                 851.88
  Le Moyne Fund, _for Memphis, Tenn._                146.25
  Lincoln Schp. Fund, _for Talladega C._              22.50
  Luke Memorial Fund, _for Talladega C._              10.00
  Scholarship Fund, _for Straight U._                 60.00
  Stone Schp. Fund, _for Talladega C._                25.00
  Straight University Schp. Fund                      11.25
  Tuthill King Fund, _for Berea C._                   75.00
  Tuthill King Fund, _for Atlanta U._                135.00
  S. Wadham's Theo. Schp. Fund                        22.50
  J. and L. H. Wood Schp. Fund, _for Talladega C._    25.00
  Yale Library Fund, _for Talladega C._                9.00
                                                     ------     2,690.00


TUITION $4,561.35.

  Cappahosic, Va. Tuition                             21.00
  Lexington, Ky. Tuition                             182.00
  Williamsburg, Ky. Tuition                           25.15
  Grand View, Tenn. Tuition                           19.44
  Knoxville, Tenn. Tuition                            39.05
  Memphis, Tenn. Tuition                             540.45
  Nashville, Tenn. Tuition                           506.21
  Pleasant Hill, Tenn. Tuition                        54.95
  Chapel Hill, N. C. Tuition                           6.75
  Beaufort, N. C. Tuition                             15.10
  Blowing Rock, N. C. Tuition                         29.27
  Enfield, N. C. Tuition                              10.00
  Hillsboro, N. C. Tuition                            17.65
  King's Mountain, N. C. Tuition                      30.00
  Saluda, N. C. Tuition                               14.95
  Troy, N. C. Tuition                                  5.15
  Whittier, N. C. Tuition                              6.27
  Wilmington, N. C. Tuition                          204.50
  Charleston, S. C. Tuition                          337.75
  Greenwood, S. C. Tuition                           100.71
  Albany, Ga. Tuition                                150.00
  Andersonville, Ga. Tuition                          11.35
  Atlanta, Ga., Storrs Sch. Tuition                  159.93
  Macon, Ga. Tuition                                 253.06
  McIntosh, Ga. Tuition                               97.17
  Marietta, Ga. Tuition                               11.13
  Marshallville, Ga. Tuition                          29.25
  Savannah, Ga. Tuition                              162.11
  Thomasville, Ga. Tuition                            44.63
  Woodville, Ga. Tuition                               2.30
  Joppa, Ala. Tuition                                 27.85
  Marion, Ala. Tuition                                66.05
  Mobile, Ala. Tuition                                74.75
  Nat, Ala. Tuition                                   75.25
  Selma, Ala. Tuition                                102.25
  Talladega, Ala. Tuition                            265.72
  Meridian, Miss. Tuition                             98.50
  Moorhead, Miss. Tuition                             25.15
  Tougaloo, Miss. Tuition                             71.00
  New Orleans, La. Tuition                           482.15
  Orange Park, Fla. Tuition                           42.15
  Austin, Texas. Tuition                             143.25
                                                     ------     4,561.35
                                                              ----------
                                          Total for December  $23,659.07
                                                              ==========


SUMMARY.

  Donations                                      $42,071.23
  Estates                                         22,138.62
                                                 ----------   $64,209.85
  Income                                                        3,465.00
  Tuition                                                       9,222.46
                                                              ----------
  Total from Oct. 1 to Dec. 31                                $76,897.31
                                                              ==========


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  Subscriptions for December                                      $78.82
  Previously acknowledged                                          53.05
                                                                 -------
  Total                                                          $131.87
                                                                 =======

    H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
    Bible House, N. Y.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of American Missionary - Volume 50, No.
2, February, 1896, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AMERICAN MISSIONARY ***

***** This file should be named 21595.txt or 21595.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/5/9/21595/

Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Karen Dalrymple, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by Cornell University Digital Collections)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
