The Project Gutenberg EBook of Beauty and the Beast, by Unknown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Beauty and the Beast

Author: Unknown

Release Date: November 3, 2007 [EBook #23311]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEAUTY AND THE BEAST ***




Produced by Jacqueline Jeremy, Janet Blenkinship and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)











Beauty and the Beast.

Peter G. Thomson Cincinnati, O.




BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.


There was once a merchant who had been very rich at one time, but who,
having had heavy losses, was compelled to retire to a little cottage in
the country; where he lived with his three daughters. The two elder ones
were very much discontented at their poverty, and were always grumbling
and making complaints. But the youngest one, who was called Beauty, and
who was as amiable as she was handsome, tried all she could to comfort
her father and make his home happy.

Once, when he was going on a journey to try and mend his affairs, he
called them around him, and asked them what he should bring them when he
returned. The two elder ones wanted each a number of nice presents; but
Beauty, kissing him sweetly, said she would be content with a rose. So
when the merchant was on his way back, he came to an elegant garden, of
which the gate stood open; and thinking of Beauty's rose, he went in,
and plucking a beautiful one, prepared to proceed on his journey.

[Illustration: The Merchant and the Beast.]

As he turned to go, he saw a hideous Beast coming towards him, armed
with a sword! This terrible creature reproached him for stealing his
flowers, of which he was very choice; and threatened to kill him on the
spot! The merchant begged for his life, and said, that he had only taken
"a single one to please his daughter Beauty." On this, the beast said
gruffly, "well, I will let you off, if you will bring one of your
daughters here in your place. But she must come here _willingly_, and
meanwhile you may stay and rest in my palace until to-morrow." But, as
you may well believe, the poor father did not feel much like eating or
sleeping; although everything was done for his comfort, and, in the
morning, the Beast sent him home upon a beautiful horse. But though the
birds sang around him, and the sun shone brightly, and all nature was
smiling on his path, the heart of the poor merchant was heavy, when he
thought of his beloved daughters.

When he came near his home, his children came forth to meet him; but,
seeing the sadness of his face, and his eyes filled with tears, they
asked him the cause of his trouble. Giving the rose to Beauty, he told
her all. The two elder sisters laid all the blame upon Beauty; who cried
bitterly, and said that as _she_ was the cause of her father's
misfortune, she alone must suffer for it, and was quite willing to go.
So Beauty got ready for the journey at once. The father (who meant to
return to the Beast _himself_, after embracing his children) tried to
dissuade her, but in vain; and so the two set out together for the
Beast's palace, much to the secret joy of the envious sisters.

When they arrived at the palace, the doors opened of themselves, sweet
music was heard, and they found an elegant supper prepared. As soon as
they had refreshed themselves, the Beast entered, and said in a mild
tone, "Beauty, did you come here willingly to take the place of your
father?" "Yes, sir," she answered in a sweet but trembling voice. "So
much the better for you," replied the Beast. "Your father can stay here
to-night, but he must go home in the morning." The Beast then retired,
giving Beauty so kind a look as he went out, that she felt quite
encouraged. The next morning, when her father left her, she cheered his
heart by telling him that she thought she could soften the Beast's
heart, and induce him to spare her life. After he was gone, she entered
an elegant room, on the door of which was written, in letters of gold,
"Beauty's room."

Lying on the table was a portrait of herself, set in gold and diamonds,
and on the wall, these words: "_Beauty is Queen here; all things will
obey her._" Her meals were served to the sound of music; and at
supper-time, the Beast after knocking timidly, would walk in and talk so
amiably, that she soon lost all fear of him; and once when he failed to
come, felt quite disappointed! At last, one night, he said to her, "Am I
so _very_ ugly?" "Yes, indeed, you are," said Beauty, "but you are so
kind and generous, that I do not mind your looks." "Will you marry me,
then, dear Beauty?" said the poor Beast, with a look of such eager
entreaty in his eyes, that Beauty's heart melted within her, and she was
upon the point of saying "Yes!"

[Illustration: Beauty takes her Fathers place.]

But happening to look towards him, at that moment her courage failed
her, and, turning away her head, she replied softly, "Oh! do not ask
me." The Beast then bade her good-night, with a sad voice, and went away
sighing as if his heart would break. The palace was full of rooms,
containing the most beautiful objects. In one room she saw a numerous
troupe of monkeys, of all sizes and colors. They came to meet her,
making her very low bows, and treating her with the greatest respect.
Beauty was much pleased with them, and asked them to show her about the
palace. Instantly, two tall and graceful apes, in rich dresses, placed
themselves, with great gravity, one on each side of her, while two
sprightly little monkeys held up her train as pages. And from this time
forth they waited upon her wherever she went, with all the attention and
respect, that officers of a royal palace are accustomed to pay to the
greatest Queens and Princesses.

[Illustration: Am I so very ugly.]

In fact, Beauty was the Queen of this splendid palace. She had only to
wish for anything to have it; and she would have been _quite_ contented
if she could have had some company; for, except at supper-time, she was
always alone! Then the Beast would come in and behave so agreeably, that
she liked him more and more. And when he would say to her "dear Beauty
will you marry me?" in his soft and tender way, she could hardly find it
in her heart to refuse him.

Now, although Beauty had everything that heart could wish, she could not
forget her father and sisters. At last, one evening she begged so hard
to go home for a visit, that the Beast consented to her wish, on her
promising not to stay more than two months. He then gave her a ring,
telling her to place it on her dressing-table, when she wished either to
go or return; and showed her a wardrobe filled with the most elegant
clothes, as well as a quantity of splendid presents for her father and
sisters.

The poor Beast was more sad than ever, after he had given his consent to
her absence. It seemed to him as if he could not look at her enough, nor
muster courage to leave her. She tried to cheer him, saying, "Be of good
heart, Beauty will soon return," but nothing seemed to comfort him, and
he went sadly away.

Beauty felt very badly when she saw how much the poor Beast suffered.
She tried, however, to dismiss him from her thoughts, and to think only
of the joy of seeing her dear father and sisters on the morrow. Before
retiring to rest, she took good care to place the ring upon the table,
and great was her joy, on awaking the next morning, to find herself in
her father's house, with the clothes and gifts from the palace at her
bed-side!

At first she hardly knew where she was, for everything looked strange
to her; but soon she heard the voice of her father, and, rushing out of
the room, threw her loving arms around his neck. Beauty then related all
the kindness and delicacy of the Beast toward her, and in return
discovered that _he_ had been as liberal to her father and sisters. He
had given them the large and handsome house in which they now lived,
with an income sufficient to keep them in comfort.

For a long time Beauty was happy with her father and sisters; but she
soon discovered that her sisters were jealous of her, and envied her the
fine dresses and jewels the Beast had given her. She often thought
tenderly of the poor Beast, alone in his palace; and as the two months
were now over, she resolved to return to him as she had promised. But
her father could not bear to lose her again, and coaxed her to stay with
him a few days longer; which she at last consented to do, with many
misgivings, when she thought of her broken promise to the lonely beast.
At last, on the night before she intended to return, she dreamed that
she saw the unhappy beast lying dead on the ground in the palace garden!
She awoke, all trembling with terror and remorse, and, leaving a note on
the table for her dear father; placed the ring within her bosom, and
wished herself back again in the palace. As soon as daylight appeared,
she called her attendants, and searched the palace from top to bottom.
But the Beast was nowhere to be found! She then ran to the garden, and
_there_, in the very spot that she had seen in her dream, lay the poor
Beast, gasping and senseless upon the ground; and seeming to be in the
agonies of death! At this pitiful sight, Beauty clasped her hands, fell
upon her knees, and reproached herself bitterly for having caused his
death.

"Alas! poor Beast!" she said, "_I_ am the cause of this. How can I ever
forgive myself for my unkindness to _you_, who were so good and
generous to me, and mine, and never even reproached me for my cruelty?"

[Illustration: The Beast Dying.]

She then ran to a fountain for cold water, which she sprinkled over him,
her tears meanwhile falling fast upon his hideous face. In a few moments
the Beast opened his eyes, and said, "now, that I see _you_ once more, I
shall die contented." "No, no,!" she cried, "you shall not die; you
shall live, and Beauty will be your faithful wife!" The moment she
uttered these words, a dazzling light shone around--the palace was
brilliantly lighted up, and the air was filled with delicious music.

In place of the terrible and dying Beast, she saw a young and handsome
Prince, who knelt at her feet, and told her that he had been condemned
to wear the form of a frightful Beast, until a beautiful girl should
love him in spite of his ugliness! At the same moment, the Apes, and the
Monkeys, who had been in attendance upon her, were transformed into
elegantly dressed ladies and gentlemen, who ranged themselves at a
respectful distance, and performed their duties, as Gentlemen, and Maids
of Honor. The grateful Prince now claimed Beauty for his wife; and _she_
who had loved him, even under the form of the Beast, was now tenfold
more in love with him, as he appeared in his rightful form. So the very
next day, Beauty and the Prince were married with great splendor, and
lived happily together for ever after.


       *       *       *       *       *


NEW PICTURE BOOKS.


PATIENCE, or the Poet and the Milkmaid.

_With 10 Colored Illustrations, by H. F. Farny. Founded on Gilbert &
Sullivan's Comic Opera, "Patience, or Bunthorne's Bride," adapted for
Children. PRICE, 25 CENTS._

AT HOME. After Sowerby and Crane.

_With 30 Full-page Illustrations in black, exact imitations of the
originals, with Cover and Frontispiece in color. PRICE, 15 CENTS._

SUGAR AND SPICE, and Everything Nice.

_With 30 Full-page Illustrations, in black. Cover and Frontispiece in
colors, and Verses adapted to the Illustrations. PRICE, 15 CENTS._

PICTURES TO PAINT.

_Consisting of 30 pages of Outline Illustrations, adapted for Coloring,
with Rhymes. PRICE, 15 CENTS._

UNDER THE WINDOW. Painting Book.

_Consisting of 30 pages of Outline Drawings, selected from the various
works of Kate Greenaway, adapted for Coloring. PRICE, 15 CENTS._

BIG PICTURE BOOK SERIES.

_Twelve kinds, large 4to., each consisting of Six Full-page
Illustrations, in colors, with Titles in gold and colors, as follows:--_

  =Cinderella.=
  =Puss in Boots.=
  =Red Riding Hood.=
  =The Happy Family.=
  =Jack and the Bean Stalk.=
  =Jack the Giant Killer.=
  =Drill of the A. B. C. Army.=
  =Night before Christmas.=
  =Sinbad the Sailor.=
  =Blue Beard.=
  =Aladdin.=
  =Humpty Dumpty.=

CHIMNEY CORNER SERIES. 25 Cts. Each.

_Three kinds, large 4to., each consisting of eight Full-page
Illustrations, in colors. The largest and handsomest books of the kind
yet published._

  =Mother Goose's Melodies.=
  =Clever Cats.=
  =Robinson Crusoe.=

AUNT LAURA'S SERIES. 10 Cts. Each.

_Six kinds, large 8vo., each containing six Full-page Colored
Illustrations, viz:_

  =Mamma's A. B. C. Book.=
  =Rip Van Winkle.=
  =Cock Robin.=
  =Our Four Footed Friends.=
  =Nursery Rhymes.=
  =Mother Hubbard.=

MARY BELL'S SERIES. 5 Cts. Each.

Eight kinds, small 4to., each containing four Full-page colored
Illustrations. The largest and best books for the price yet published,
viz:

  =Hop O' My Thumb.=
  =Children in the Wood.=
  =Red Riding Hood.=
  =Tom Thumb.=
  =Little Playmates.=
  =Goody Two Shoes.=
  =Beauty and the Beast.=
  =Little Tommy's Sled Ride.=

PETER G. THOMSON,

PUBLISHER, CINCINNATI, O.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Beauty and the Beast, by Unknown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEAUTY AND THE BEAST ***

***** This file should be named 23311.txt or 23311.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/3/1/23311/

Produced by Jacqueline Jeremy, Janet Blenkinship and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
