Project Gutenberg's In The Valley Of The Shadow, by Josephine Daskam

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: In The Valley Of The Shadow

Author: Josephine Daskam

Release Date: November 6, 2007 [EBook #23365]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW ***




Produced by David Widger






IN THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW

By Josephine Daskam

Copyright, 1903, by Charles Scribner's Sons


TO Belden, pacing the library doggedly, the waiting seemed interminable,
the strain unnecessarily prolonged. A half-hour ago quick feet had
echoed through the upper halls, windows had opened, doors all but
slammed, vague whisperings and drawn breaths had hovered impalpably
about the whole place; but now all was utterly quiet. His own regular
footfall alone disturbed the unnatural stillness of a large house.

Outside, the delicious October sun poured down through an atmosphere of
faultless blue. The foliage was thick yet, and the red-and-yellow
leaves danced heartlessly in the wind. A year ago they had gone on a
nutting-party, and Clarice had raced with the children and picked up
more than anybody else. Now--even to think of her brought that faint
odor of salts-of-lavender and beef-tea that disheartened him so,
somehow, when he sat by her bed coaxing her into sipping the stuff.

Some one was coming down the stairs. It was Peter's step--his new one
since last Friday, when they had all, it seemed, begun to walk and talk
and breathe a little differently. Belden hurried across the room and
caught him at the foot of the steps.

"Well, old man, how goes it?" he demanded, with a determined
cheerfulness.

His brother-in-law stared at him emptily.

"It's to-morrow," he said, gripping the newel-post, "to-morrow
afternoon. Jameson is coming--they'll do it here. Jameson brings his
special nurse for the--the operation, but the other one is due at five,
and you get her just the same. I told Henry to put up the dog-cart. I
don't know, though--maybe the runabout--no, the tire's loose. Still, it
might do--"

"For heaven's sake, Peter, don't bother about it! I'll find a rig. What
else does he say?"

"He says there's a good fighting chance--a very good one. He says her
grit alone--Oh, Belden, what shall we do? _What_ shall we do?"

Peter sat down heavily on the lowest stair.

"Only last week she was so well--and yet she really wasn't. I suppose
he knows. But it doesn't seem possible--I can't get it through my head.
Poor little Caddy! She never had a sick day in her life. No headaches,
like most Women, even--no nonsense--Oh, Belden, _what_ shall we do?"

"Brace up, Peter; think what a good fighting chance means, think of
that! It's not as if Caddy were old; she has that on her side. She's
seven years behind me, you know."

Peter scowled. "You're fifty, aren't you?"

"Not a bit. Only forty-eight, and just that, too. Now you go out and get
the nurse, and I'll stay here. It'll do you a lot of good. Don't mope
around in the house all day--what's the use?"

"I can't leave the house. Honestly, Belden, I can't. I've tried twice,
and I just walk right back. It's no good. There's the cart--and you
won't be long, will you?"

Belden took up the reins with a vague sense of momentary relief: it was
something to do. Under the influence of the fresh autumn air his spirits
rose; he found himself enjoying the swift rattle of the cart and the
beat of the horse's feet. After all, think of Caddy's grit; think of
her fine constitution! A fighting chance--that was little enough to say,
though. Why couldn't he have put it a little stronger? Hitchcock always
was a pessimist.

At the station the usual crowd of well-dressed suburbanites quieted
their horses and waited impatiently for the express. As Belden drew up
into line, they greeted him with a subdued interest; coachmen left their
seats to ask how Mrs. Moore was to-day, and when could one see her? A
sudden mist came over his eyes as he answered briefly, "Very soon--I
hope."

The train thundered in; in an incredibly short time all the guests and
commuters were hurried off toward town--where was that nurse?

As his glance wandered through the thinning crowd, it was met suddenly
and squarely by two brown eyes set in a fresh pink face framed by dark
hair lightly sprinkled with gray. The second that he looked into that
woman's eyes taught him her character, absolutely, as finally as if
he had grown up with her. One could trust her to the last ditch, he
thought.

She walked straight up to the cart. "I am the nurse sent for by Dr.
Hitchcock. Are you Mr. Moore?"

"I am Mrs. Moore's brother--Mr. Belden," he explained. "Have you your
checks?"

"That is all arranged," she returned briefly. "I am all ready. May I ask
you to hurry? Dr. Hitchcock was anxious for me to see her before six,
when the fever begins."

His nerves were more sharply edged than he knew: an instant irritation
seized him.

"There is plenty of room in the back of the cart," he insisted, "the
express people are very uncertain. Would you not better give me the
checks?"

She swung herself up beside him with a firm, assured motion; for a
heavily built woman she carried herself very lightly.

"I think not," she said decidedly, "the man has started, I am sure. I
would rather lose no time."

He bowed and started the horse: he disliked her already. To a
deep-seated, involuntary disgust that any woman should have to earn her
living he added a displeased wonder that one should choose this method
of doing it. There must be disagreeable details connected with it,
embarrassments, absolute indignities: why did they not marry? This woman
was good-looking enough. She was very obstinate--almost dictatorial. His
idea of womanhood was hopelessly confused with clouds of white tulle,
appealing eyes, and a desire for guidance. It was impossible to connect
any of these characteristics with the woman beside him.

For a while they drove in silence. Then compunction seized him and he
remarked on the beauty of the foliage. She assented easily, but seemed
no more relieved by the speech than embarrassed by the silence. It
was impossible to treat her as a hired servant: one felt a strong
personality in her. Before they reached the house he was searching for
conversation that should not bore her.

As they stepped into the wide hall, where he observed with a shade of
displeasure that her luggage had come before them, Dr. Hitchcock met
them.

"Ah, Miss Strong, glad to see you. Come right up. On time, as usual, of
course! I was afraid you couldn't make it. Jameson comes to-morrow, you
know--"

They were up the stairs; Belden stood idly in the hall where they had
left him. He had had an idea of showing her the house, stating some of
the facts of Clarice's sudden and terrible need of her, indicating that
in a family so jarred from the very foundations it would be wiser to
look to him than to the bewildered master of the establishment; but this
was not necessary.

Evidently she persisted in dispensing with his services.

His hand slipped to his vest pocket, but he replaced the cigar
uncertainly: it seemed not quite the thing to smoke. Ought he to go to
Peter? In his mind's eye he saw the poor fellow haunting the landing by
Caddy's door; he had an idea that in some way he kept things quiet by
doing this. And how could one be sure that the troubled creature wanted
company?

There was a violent ring at the bell, a jarring of wheels on the
asphalt. The door flew open and the prettiest little woman imaginable,
all fluffy ends and scarlet flowers and orris scent, rushed toward him.

"Oh, Will! Oh, Will!" she gasped, "isn't it terrible? Where is Peter?
Can I see her? Oh, Will!"

Instinctively he took her in his arms--one always did that with Peter's
sister--and she put her head on his shoulder and cried a little, while
he patted her and murmured, "There, there!"

She was so manifestly comforted, and it was so pleasant to comfort
her--this was what a woman should be. He felt a renewed sense of
capacity, of readiness for even the most terrible emergency. He led her
gently to the great cushioned window-seat and listened sympathetically
to her excited babblings.

"It will kill Peter--it will kill him! In--in a great m-many ways, you
know, Will, Peter isn't so--so c-calm as Caddy. He is just bound up in
her. Suppose--Oh, Will!"

"Don't cry, Sue dear, don't!" he said soothingly. "She has a good
chance--a fine chance, really. These things are mostly resisting power,
you know, and grit, and think what a lot of grit Caddy's got!"

"Oh, I know, I know! Don't you know when the baby died--that first
baby--and s-she was so weak she could hardly speak? 'Never mind,
P-Peter, we'll have another!' Oh, dear, she was so pl-plucky, Will! And
now to think--"

He choked a little. "I know, I know," he murmured, "Caddy's a brick. She
always was."

She sat up, not wholly withdrawing from his arm, and patted her eyes,
breathing brokenly. Little gusts of orris floated toward him.

"Where are the children?" she asked, almost herself now.

"They're here--Peter wants them one minute and sends them away the next.
I should send them to grandmother's, but he won't hear of it."

A light step sounded on the stair. The nurse appeared on the lower
landing. She was dressed in cool blue gingham; the straps of her white
apron marked the firm, broad lines of her bust and shoulder.

"Is this Mrs. Wylie?" she said in her clear, assured voice. "Mrs. Moore
would like to see her a moment. Will you come with me?"

"I will come directly," and Sue gathered together her gloves and
hand-bag.

"She's very good-looking--it's a pity her hair is so gray," she breathed
in his ear. As the two women stood together a moment on the landing he
realized, not for the first time, that Sue was a little too small. But
he had never thought her sallow before.

Peter came in by the greenhouse door, walking slowly, his hands behind
his back. He looked old for the first time in his jolly, persistently
boyish life.

"Those chrysanthemums are all drying up," he complained fretfully; "not
one of the blamed servants has done a thing since--since--O Lord, Will,
what shall we be doing this time tomorrow? Where are the children?
Where's Miss Strong? There's a woman for you! Caddy took to her
directly. She's there now. She's talking to her about the children. Oh,
my God!"

Belden grasped his hand and they walked silently up and down the hall.

"Aunt Lucia's coming to-night," Peter resumed nervously. "She will drive
me mad. Take care of her, will you? If I could have choked her off--but
when you think she was just like a mother to Cad all these years, what
can you do? She's got a right. You'd think she'd have got some sense
from living with Cad so long. I told Henry to go for her--and there you
are," he added, as the cart drew up before the open door.

Belden went slowly down the steps; he detested Aunt Lucia, and Clarice
had always stood between them.

"How do you do?" he began, assisting her from the high seat. Her long
crape veil caught in the wheel, and the numberless black and floating
ends of her costume wound themselves about him as he bent down to
disentangle her.

"Oh, Wilmot, this is a terrible day for us all, is it not? Be careful
of the hem of that veil, please. When I kissed Clarice good-by last
Christmas I little thought _what_ a good-by it was! Is she conscious?
You have muddied the boa, I think, but never mind. Can I see her once
more?"

"For Heaven's sake, Aunt Lucia, anybody would think Caddy was in
her grave! She's a long way from it yet, thank God! Of course she's
conscious, and spunky as the--as ever. I don't think you really needed
to--"

"My dear Wilmot, I prepared Clarice for her confirmation, I dressed
her for her wedding, and I was here when the children were born. If you
think that I would fail her in this crisis you have a very poor idea of
my character. But then, I am perfectly aware that you always had. Oh,
there is Peter! My poor Peter!" She rushed toward him, and Belden smiled
sardonically as his brother-in-law planted a perfunctory kiss on her
chin.

"This may comfort you, Peter, as it has me so often in such
circumstances. So short, so true, so helpful. 'Underneath are the
everlasting arms!' Do you feel that, Peter?"

"I--I--yes, indeed, Aunt Lucia--you must want a bite of something, I'm
sure, driving so far."

Peter writhed miserably in Aunt Lucia's crape-and-jet arms.

"Not till I have seen her, Peter. Afterwards I shouldn't mind. I have
brought such a beautiful address by Bishop Hunter. It was delivered on
the occasion of the death of Governor -------, unless I forgot to put it
in with my knitted shawl. I believe I did. I will send for it directly.
When my dear husband--he was so fond of Clarice--died, I read it more
than anything else, except the Prayer-book, of course. You will surely
find it a help."

"Yes, Aunt Lucia. Your room is ready, and--"

"Not till I have seen her, Peter."

"Susy is there now, and Miss Strong says nobody else this evening.
Tomorrow--"

Aunt Lucia drew away.

"Do I understand that Susy Wylie--no relation at all--is preferred
before the only mother Clarice has had for all these years?"

Peter winced. "But you weren't here, Aunt Lucia," he argued wearily.

"Who is Miss Strong?"

"Here she is!" There was great relief in Peter's voice. "Miss Strong, my
aunt, Mrs. Wetherly."

"Mrs. Moore sends you her best love, and wants you to get thoroughly
rested, so that you can see her the first thing in the morning, Mrs.
Wetherly. She says you are not to let them frighten you."

As if by magic the formidable frown faded from Aunt Lucia's forehead.
She smiled approvingly at the nurse.

"Very well. I should like to ask you a few questions--Clarice was always
thoughtful."

They moved away together. The two men stared at each other.

"How do you account for that?" Belden queried.

"Oh, it's her calm way and her voice. You want to do everything she
says. Norah says she's sure Mrs. Moore will get well now, with her to
take care of her. By George, Will, if she pulls Caddy through it'll be
worth her while, I tell you."

"Oh, they always do their best. And they all have that habit, I fancy.
It's part of the training."

Peter looked up surprised.

"You don't like her, eh?"

"How absurd. I never considered her particularly. I don't care for
masculine, dictatorial women, on general principles--"

"Oh, nonsense! I tell you you've taken a grudge against her, and you
want to get rid of it as soon as possible."

"I suppose I have a right to my opinion," Belden began hotly, but a wave
of remorse surged over him at sight of the other man's drawn, nervous
face.

"Any one would think we had nothing to do but scrap over a trained
nurse," he said lightly. "She's all you say, I haven't a doubt, old man,
and if she pulls Caddy through, I'll sing her praises louder than any of
you."

They sat in silence. A burst of laughter from the kitchen-garden
startled them, and Belden started up as if to check it.

"Don't stop 'em--it's the servants. Why shouldn't they laugh?" said
Peter quietly. "I've been thinking it all over. If Caddy--if--if she
doesn't get well, she doesn't want a lot of black and all that. It's bad
for the children. And she said the children oughtn't to grow up without
a mother--think of that!"

"I guess that's all right," said Belden sadly. "Look at my boy there!"

A slender, stoop-shouldered lad slouched by the long hall-window, his
hands in his pockets, an unlighted cigarette in his mouth.

"Well, well, we all have our load!" Peter's mood had changed utterly, to
the other's astonishment. He seemed gentler, more thoughtful, controlled
beyond belief.

"I don't see why we shouldn't smoke," he added, and they lighted cigars.

"You see, we talked it all over," he said, half to himself, "and she's
so reasonable and calm, herself.... She says Margaret's going to grow up
just like her. That's a comfort.. And there's the boy."

Suddenly the cigar dropped from his lips to the floor.

"Good God, Belden!" he shouted, "I kept thinking she'd be here, too! I
forgot--I--Oh, what rot! Do you think I'll stand it? Do you think I'll
put up with it? Why didn't Hitchcock know before? It was his business to
know! I tell you I'll ruin that man if it takes every dollar I've got!"

Belden stared at him helplessly. Was this Peter, this red-faced,
scowling menace? As he watched him silently the nurse came in from the
greenhouse.

"Mrs. Moore wants to say good night to you, Mr. Moore," she said, her
deep, clear voice echoing strangely after the hoarse passion of Peter's
rage. "I found these all picked--were you going to take them to her?"

Peter drew a deep breath and put out a shaking hand for the flowers.

"I don't know what's the matter with me, Will--I talk like a fool," he
half whispered. "I can't get used to this damned see-saw. First I'm all
ready for it, and then I'm nearly wild. And so it goes--up and down, up
and down."

"How is she? Is it all settled for to-morrow? Hitchcock said that
perhaps--"

"Mrs. Moore is doing very well--really very well. She was a little
excited when Mrs. Wylie was with her, but she is nicely sleepy now.
I think it will be better to stay only a moment. She will get a good
night's rest to-night, it is so cool. The weather is on our side."

She smiled into his eyes and nodded gravely. He brightened and squared
his shoulders. As he went quickly up the stairs, Belden stopped the
woman.

"Tell me," he said authoritatively, "how is my sister, really? What do
you consider her chance?"

She looked him easily in the eyes. "It is impossible to say," she
returned gravely. "Your sister is a very brave, self-possessed woman,
and seems to have a good constitution. That is, of course, half the
battle. But her case is very complicated, and until the operation, no
one can tell. You may have every confidence in Dr. Jameson. He is a
magnificent surgeon."

Before her non-committal eyes his own fell baffled. He was more
irritated than he cared to own. Could she not see that he was prepared
for anything, that his self-control was as great as her own? She treated
him like a child; those professional reserves, necessary, doubtless,
in the case of Peter and his excitable sister, were wasted on him. Why
could she not see it?

"I am quite aware of Dr. Jameson's skill," he said coldly, "but I
had hoped that you would find yourself able to break through the
professional attitude sufficiently to give me your real opinion, which,
of course, you must have formed."

She threw him a quick glance. "Ah, my friend," he thought exultingly,
"you have a temper, then!" But in an instant it was gone.

"I have told you all I was able to tell," she said evenly. "I have been
here but a short time, you know."

She turned and left the hall, and he, chafing under a sense of merited
rebuke, conscious of a foolish petulance, went discontentedly into the
library. He seemed to be continually at fault with Miss Strong, but
unable to resist the effort to master her.

The evening was very lonely and still. Peter had gone to his room early,
and the children had effaced themselves: Susy was with them. Aunt Lucia
read the "Imitation of Christ," by the fire. Bel-den's mind turned
unconsciously to the old days when Caddy and he dreamed out their future
in the nursery. It had all come out just as she had planned, except
this. Poor little Caddy--a fighting chance!

The next morning seemed to fly by them: it was nine o'clock, ten,
eleven.

At this hour a feverish activity suddenly spread through the house. They
met and passed each other, hurrying, troubled, secretive; the servants
stumbled and quarrelled in their purposeless haste. To Belden, quieting
when he could, sternly optimistic everywhere, at heart heavy and
uncertain, it seemed that the one anchor of their hopes was this calm,
clear-eyed woman in her uniform of authority!

Peter hung pathetically on her lightest word; the children, dazed and
terrified, ate and exercised at her command; his own boy, a strange
hard look in his furtive eyes, followed her like a dog, and Aunt Lucia
submitted with unprecedented meekness to an abrupt curtailment of her
interview with Clarice. He himself went into the bedroom for a moment,
half uncertain of the reality of the experience. It was absurd to
remember that he might never see her, conscious, again--his own little
Caddy.

He sat awkwardly on the side of the bed.

"Well, little woman, how goes it?"

"Queen's taste, Will!"

"Good for you! I'm proud of the Beldens, Caddy--Billy acts like a
drum-major."

Her eyes softened.

"The dear boy," she murmured. Their eyes met. "_Look after him_," hers
said, and his, "_As long as I live!_" He stooped and kissed her lightly.
"Mind you look as well as this to-morrow!"

"Oh, I shall be all right. Miss Strong will take care of me. When I
think how I have the best of everything--such care--I've been a very
happy woman, Will dear."

His eyes filled. He threw her a kiss and went out blindly.

A hand touched his arm. "You've done her good," said the nurse softly.
"You stayed just long enough. She'll take her nap now."

He went heavily into his own room. Below him a little porch led out from
the smoking-room, and as he sat lost in a miserable reverie, voices rose
from it to his window.

"Nobody knows what she's been to me. As much like a mother as I'd let
her. I did everything but the cigarettes, and I meant to tell her I'd do
that too, next month--that's her birthday."

Was this his boy, that pleading, shaken voice? He looked out: the lad
was fingering Miss Strong's white apron nervously. She leaned over the
railing of the little porch, her hand on his shoulder.

"You tell her about it--I'll never smoke another one. It was the last
thing she asked me."

"I'll tell her--she will be so pleased, I know. She asked about you
yesterday. I'll let you know as soon as I can."

Belden, a little later, hurried downstairs, with a confused idea of
thanking her. On the threshold of the library he paused, amazed.
Dr. Hitchcock sat before a small green baize table, studying five
playing-cards held fan-shape in his left hand. Opposite him sat Miss
Strong, holding the pack expectantly.

"You can give me two, my dear, I think," he said as Belden entered.
Looking up, he smiled apologetically.

"I dare say you are surprised," he suggested, "but I have been much
exasperated, Mr. Belden, and a long experience has taught me that
nothing so quickly clears the mind as throwing a few hands of poker.
Miss Strong--an invaluable person--is kindly assisting me. Did I say
three? Yes, of course. Thank you. We are playing for beans only, you
see."

Belden watched them curiously. She sat as imperturbably as by Caddy's
bedside, her eyes fixed thoughtfully on her cards.

"--And raise you three," she said.

"Five more. You will excuse me, Belden, but your aunt, Mrs. Wetherly, is
a somewhat unusually irritating woman. I'll see you, Miss Strong--ah,
yes, two pair, queens up."

"What has she done?"

"She insists that Mrs. Moore shall not only see Mr. Burchard, to which
I have not the least objection, but that he shall hold a communion
service, directly, there. Now, if your sister had asked for this
herself, it would be another matter, but unless this is the case I
always regard it as a depressing agent. It is a strain, in any case."

"I think Mrs. Moore will go through with it very easily, doctor," Miss
Strong interposed, slipping the cards into their leather envelope and
gathering up the beans. "She will be fresh from her nap, and it will
be very short. She has promised Mrs. Wetherly, you know, and it would
distress her more to break it--"

"All right, all right. Have it your way. Much obliged."

He took the cards from her and went out.

"My aunt is very trying," Belden began.

"Oh, many people feel so about it," she assured him, "especially High
Church people. She only did what she thought right."

He drew a breath of relief.

"You'll see she's not too tired?" he asked; and as he went to luncheon
he wondered at the comfort he derived from her mute nod.

He was roused from the table, where the dishes left by them were
untouched for the most part, by a disturbance in the hall.

"It's the priest," the waitress murmured, and with a frown he checked
her rising tears.

Aunt Lucia bustled through the room.

"You must come, Wilmot," she whispered eagerly, "she asked for you.
Peter is locked into his room, and neither of the children has been
confirmed. Susy, of course, is a Presbyterian. Not that dear Mr.
Burchard would object--he is so broad. But you have no excuse. Oh, it is
beautiful, Wilmot! She looks so lovely!"

He followed her wearily. What did it matter? It seemed to him ominous,
terrible--but it would please Caddy. She sat propped up in the bed.
Her cheeks were crimson, her eyes bright. White chrysanthemums stood
in silver vases, candles burned softly on the white-draped dresser. Mr.
Burchard, in the hall just beyond, was slipping his surplice over his
head. A faint odor of wine mingled with the flowers.

Belden dared not look at her. She was to him, in that moment, mystic,
holy, a thing apart. He dropped on his knees beside a silvery white
apron, his eyes on the floor, his heart beating hard.

The clergyman entered slowly, the service began. It was all a murmured
maze to him. Aunt Lucia sobbed quietly beside him, but as he glanced
at her he caught a light on her wet, uplifted face that thrilled him
strangely. Her deep responses spoke a faith and surety that swallowed
for the moment all her little sillinesses and obstinacies.

The solemn words grew in intensity, the candles flickered audibly in the
sacred hush. The clergyman moved toward the bed, and they heard Caddy's
breath draw out in a deep, shuddering sob; her teeth chattered against
the cup.

Belden set his jaw; it was cruel, brutal! They were killing her. His
clinched fist moved blindly toward his neighbor: he touched her hand and
gripped it fiercely.

In front of him on the wall hung a large photograph of Billy's base-ball
nine in full uniform. He could have drawn it from memory, afterwards.
Billy, he remembered, was a great catcher. He held hard to that cool,
firm hand.

"--be amongst you and remain with you always. Amen." There was a little
stir. The hand was drawn from his.

"Come, now," whispered Aunt Lucia, and he walked, stumbling and stiff
from kneeling, from the room. At the door he glanced a second backward,
but only Dr. Hitchcock was to be seen, bending over the bed. Miss Strong
had already taken away candles and flowers, and Caddy's triple mirror
was back on the dresser.

Mr. Burchard, in his long black cassock, offered his hand cordially.

"I am glad you could be with us, Mr. Belden," he began, but the other
broke in:

"If you have tired her, if this--makes a difference--" he muttered
fiercely, "you will have me to settle with. Mind that!"

He hurried down the stairs, his hands still clinched. Peter was starting
off with the road-wagon. They nodded shortly at each other.

From then the time raced on incredibly. The great surgeon, with his two
assistants, was in the hall; he was on the stairs; he was lost to sight.
There was a momentary rush and bustle, the closing of a door. Peter
came out, whispering to himself, and disappeared somewhere. The others,
clustered in the library, spoke fitfully.

"They carried her on a cot into the west room," somebody murmured close
to Belden. It was little Margaret. "I saw her. She waved her hand at me!
I threw her a kiss. Miss Strong smiled at me--I love Miss Strong."

Aunt Lucia sobbed. Susy bit her lip and played with Billy's unwilling
hand.

"Where's my father? Where's he gone?" he demanded. "Who's that other
woman with the apron?"

Miss Strong appeared at the door. "She has taken the ether very well
indeed; they are much pleased," she said softly. They hung on her words,
they overwhelmed her with questions. She soothed them like children.

It grew suddenly clear to Belden that Caddy would die. It must be so.
He wondered that they had hoped for anything else. He was sorry for
them all. He watched indifferently while Miss Strong led the children
away--he knew she was taking them to their father. Later, while Aunt
Lucia, on her knees, read through streaming eyes from her prayer-book,
and Susy talked nervously to him, he watched the firm, full figure of
the woman pacing up and down the piazza outside, her arm drawn through
his restless boy's.

"God bless her!" he said aloud.

Afterwards he could never recall the consecutive happenings of the end.
He saw only separate pictures.

In one, a strange young man opened the door and said the words that
frightened them with delight.

In another, a drawn, old, white-faced man--surely not Dr.
Jameson--leaned weakly in a chair, while a woman handed him a tiny glass
of colored liquid.

In yet another, a father hid his face in his little daughter's bosom
and sobbed, with shaking shoulders; his tall son smiled bravely over the
bent head.

In the last picture he himself bore a part; for when he came upon his
shy, suspicious boy clasped in the kind arms of the woman whose brown
eyes, once seen, had haunted his thoughts ever since, he gathered them
both to him irresistibly. As he laid his cheek against hers, he felt
that it was wet with tears.

"It lies with you now," he whispered in her ear, "to give her back to
us, well and strong. He says you can. Afterwards--"

She drew away from him.

"I--I must go. I am so glad--I will do my best," she answered
unsteadily.

He caught her hand. "And afterwards?" he repeated, a growing mastery in
his voice. She tried to meet his eyes, but her own fell, conquered.






End of Project Gutenberg's In The Valley Of The Shadow, by Josephine Daskam

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW ***

***** This file should be named 23365.txt or 23365.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/3/6/23365/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
