Project Gutenberg's Educational Work of the Boy Scouts, by Lorne W. Barclay

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Educational Work of the Boy Scouts

Author: Lorne W. Barclay

Release Date: June 17, 2009 [EBook #29147]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EDUCATIONAL WORK OF THE BOY SCOUTS ***




Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)












DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

BUREAU OF EDUCATION

BULLETIN, 1921, No. 41

EDUCATIONAL WORK OF THE BOY SCOUTS

By

LORNE W. BARCLAY

          DIRECTOR OF THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
          BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA

       *       *       *       *       *

[Advance sheets from the Biennial Survey of Education in the United
States, 1918-1920]

[Illustration: Department of the Interior Logo]

                WASHINGTON
          GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                  1921




                   ADDITIONAL COPIES
          OF THIS PUBLICATION MAY BE PROCURED FROM
             THE SUPERINTENDENT OF DOCUMENTS
                GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                   WASHINGTON, D. C.
                         AT
                   5 CENTS PER COPY




EDUCATIONAL WORK OF THE BOY SCOUTS.

By LORNE W. BARCLAY.

_Director of the Department of Education, Boy Scouts of America._

       *       *       *       *       *

        CONTENTS.--Scouting and the schools--Scouting and
          citizenship--The pioneer scout--Seascouting, a
          branch of the Boy Scouts of America--National
          Councils endeavor to discover vital facts in
          regard to the boyhood of the Nation--International
          aspects of scouting--Scout handbooks, organs, and
          other literature--Motion pictures for boys.

       *       *       *       *       *


SCOUTING AND THE SCHOOLS.

Scouting continues to enjoy the cordial indorsement of school men
everywhere all over the country. More and more those interested are
coming to see the enormous possibilities of cooperation between the
scout movement and the schools. Many schools now give credit for scout
work done outside of the schools. Many more are in hearty sympathy with
the program as an extraschool activity.

In 1919 there were organized in connection with public schools 1,942
troops and 170 in connection with private schools. The records also show
that for the same year 1,623 scoutmasters were also school-teachers.
Many troops have their meetings in the school buildings and in turn
render good service by taking charge of fire drills, first aid and
safety first instruction, yard clean ups, flag drills, etc.

Scout leaders take the utmost pains to see that scout activities do not
in any way interfere with school duties, and troop meetings are
regularly held on Friday evening for that reason. The best results have
been obtained not by formalizing scouting, but by supplementing and
vitalizing the book work by the practical activities of the scout
program. Through scouting many a boy's healthy curiosity to know has
been whetted, so that he comes for perhaps the first time in his life to
see "sense" in books. As one school man has said, "Scouting has done
what no other system yet devised has done--made the boy _want to
learn_."

The National Education Association, meeting in Chicago in 1919, had a
special scouting section which was particularly helpful, interesting,
and conducive to closer cooperation between the scout movement and the
public schools.

The department of education of the National Council is at present
engaged in working out the development of a national policy governing
the relations between scouting and the schools, for important and
successful as the work has hitherto been, it is believed that only the
very outskirts of the possible fields of mutual helpfulness have yet
been reached.


SCOUTING AND CITIZENSHIP.

The making of good citizens is one of the chief aims of the scout
movement. Everything in its program contributes directly and indirectly
to this end. Every boy who associates himself with the movement is
impressed with a sense of personal responsibility. If he sees a heap of
rubbish that might cause a fire or collect disease-carrying germs, he is
taught to report these traps to the proper authorities without delay. He
is enlisted in every movement for community betterment and good health.
Scouts are organized for service and have participated in hundreds of
city-clean-up and city-beautiful, and "walk-rite" campaigns. They fight
flies and mosquitoes and fever-carrying rats. They assist forest wardens
and park commissioners in preserving and protecting trees and planting
new ones. They help the police in handling traffic in crowded
conditions, as in parades, fairs, etc., and work with fire departments
in spreading public information as to fire prevention, as well as
actively participating in cooperation with fire brigades.

All this means the making of an intelligent, alert, responsible
citizenry, dedicated to being helpful to all people at all times, to
keep themselves physically strong, mentally awake, morally straight, to
do their duty to God and country.


THE PIONEER SCOUT.

In order that boys who live in remote country districts may enjoy the
benefits of the scout training, even though it is not possible for them
to join a regular troop, the Pioneer Division of the Boy Scouts of
America has been established. Pioneer Scouts follow the same program as
other scouts do, taking their tests from a specially appointed local
examiner, usually a teacher, pastor, or employer. On January 31, 1920,
there were 758 active Pioneer Scouts on record at national headquarters.
Much interest has been manifested in this branch of scouting, which has
been found to fill a real need among country boys. The State
agricultural departments and colleges have given generous aid and
indorsement, as have also the Grange, Antituberculosis League, and other
local institutions. The United States Department of Agriculture is also
lending its hearty support and indorsement to this branch of scout work.
The Secretary of Agriculture, the Hon. E. T. Meredith, says: "The Boy
Scout program fits in with the work of the rural school, the rural
church, the agricultural boys' club, and other rural welfare
organizations. They should go hand in hand."


SCOUTING AND AMERICANIZATION.

Mr. James E. West, Chief Scout Executive, makes the following statement
in his tenth annual report rendered to the National Council, Boy Scouts
of America:

          The tremendous value of the Boy Scout movement in
          the Americanization problems of this country has
          been recognized by the division of citizenship
          training, Bureau of Naturalization, Department of
          Labor, from whom was received a request that Boy
          Scouts distribute letters and cards among aliens
          in the interest of the educational work of the
          division of citizenship training. A study of the
          indorsements of the movement by national leaders
          (selected from the many received) will reveal
          similar recognition in such quarters. Many leaders
          in the organization, from coast to coast, have
          long recognized that the Boy Scouts of America
          enjoy a high privilege as well as a high
          responsibility in truly democratizing the boyhood
          of this country.

          The foreign-born boy and the son of foreign-born
          parents sit side by side with native-born boys (as
          they should) in our schools. They mingle in their
          play and in their homes. They are one boyhood. But
          it is a boyhood of marvelously diverse racial
          characteristics and tendencies. Moreover, this
          boyhood is the future manhood of America. And the
          boy inside each individual in this 8,000,000 or so
          of American youth instinctively responds to the
          Boy Scout program. As America is the melting pot
          of the nations, even so scouting is the melting
          pot of the boys of the nations.

          Fortunately, the program needs no modifications or
          special manipulation to "Americanize" its
          followers. It is inherently an Americanizing
          program. In Manhattan's crowded East Side, since
          1912, when the first scout troop was founded
          there, thousands of boys have taken the Scout Oath
          and Law and followed its principles and lived its
          out-of-door life. To-day there are 25 troops in
          New York City, numbering 800 boys. Every
          scoutmaster and assistant scoutmaster in the
          district is an ex-scout. These troops have a
          splendid record of war-service work, and it has
          been declared of them that they were the greatest
          single agency in operation rightly to interpret
          the war to their foreign-born neighbors.

          The aggressive introduction of scouting into all
          our industrial sections, the enlistment of the men
          of those sections (who are eligible) as local
          council members, troop committeemen, scoutmasters,
          the fullest possible round of scouting activities
          for the men and the boys in this country who do
          not yet know America, but aspire to be her sons,
          will help to solve all our industrial problems and
          preserve our national ideals and institutions.


SEA SCOUTING--A BRANCH OF THE BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA.

Sea scouting is another important branch of scouting which aims to
develop water scouting and nautical activities and training of all
sorts. Chief Sea Scout James A. Wilder says:

          Sea scouting is the way whereby scouting fulfills
          its obligation to the American boy to prepare him
          for emergencies on water as well as on land. High
          officials of the Navy and the merchant marine have
          expressed their unqualified approval of the entire
          program of seamanship, watermanship, cloud study,
          sailmaking, boats under oars and sail, shore
          camping, and the other fascinating activities. Our
          merchant marine languishes for lack of instructed
          seamen. It is not a far cry to the time when boys
          who have followed the seascout program will be
          found in the four quarters of the globe, doing
          business on great waters because they, as sea
          scouts, received the same training which helped
          keep our flag flying on the seven seas.

During the year 1919 the sea scouting department tripled its membership
and had regularly commissioned ships in 19 States. It is essentially an
older-boy plan and is not a substitute for scouting but a development of
it. Only boys over 15 years of age are eligible to join a sea scout
ship, though a preliminary rank, that of Cabin Boy, is open to younger
scouts who are able to meet certain tests in "water preparedness" and
take the Sea Promise.

THE SEA PROMISE.

        On my honor, I will, as a scout and as a cabin
        boy, do my best to become proficient in scouting.

        1. To learn swimming and always "be prepared" to
          render aid to those in need in connection with
          water accidents.

        2. To make it my practice to know the location of
          the life-saving devices aboard every boat I go on,
          and to outline mentally any responsibility in
          maintaining order for myself and shipmates in case
          of emergency.

        3. To be vigilant and cautious, always guarding
          against water accidents.

        4. To cooperate with the responsible authorities
          for the observance of all regulations for the
          conduct and safety of boats and ever seek to
          preserve the motto of the sea, "Women and Children
          First."

Like all scouting, sea scouting is both recreation and education. A sea
scout has a jolly good time in the water and on it, but at the same time
he is acquiring a tremendous amount of practical knowledge and nautical
efficiency which will stand him in good stead whether he follows the sea
or not.


NATIONAL COUNCIL'S ENDEAVOR TO DISCOVER VITAL FACTS IN REGARD TO THE
BOYHOOD OF THE NATION.

Earnest search reveals the lack of any comprehensive and uniform data as
to the youth of the Nation, although such data are absolutely essential
if we are to reach every boy and assure him the educational and other
opportunities to which he is entitled. At the instigation of the chief
scout executive, Mr. James E. West, the National Council of the Boy
Scouts of America is endeavoring to start in motion an aggressive
campaign in the ascertaining and collecting of such facts. Each local
council is charged with the responsibility of studying conditions in its
own locality. Realizing the importance of making this study of
nation-wide extension, the National Council, at its last annual meeting
(March, 1920), passed the following resolution:

          Whereas the National Council of the Boy Scouts of
          America regard it of the utmost importance that
          there should be available for use by the Boy
          Scouts of America and other organizations
          interested in the welfare of the youth of the
          Nation all possible data relating to this subject;
          and

          Whereas investigation has proved that practically
          no uniform data of this sort are at present
          available as a basis for a thorough study of the
          situation and further development of their
          respective programs for service to the youth of
          our Nation:

          _Resolved_, That the National Council of the Boy
          Scouts of America in tenth annual meeting now
          assembled requests that the Federal Government and
          the various States of the United States shall, at
          their earliest conveniences, through their various
          appropriate departments, collate and make
          available for our use and that of other
          organizations such data as will provide
          intelligent, efficient, and economic promotion of
          the program devoted to making of good citizenship,
          and

          _Be it further resolved_, That the United States
          Bureau of Education, Census Bureau, and the
          Department of Child Welfare be especially urged to
          collate such data as are absolutely necessary for
          a thorough investigation of the problems involved;
          and

          _Be it further resolved_, That if sufficient funds
          are not at the present time available for this
          absolutely essential purpose, the Congress of the
          United States and the legislatures of the various
          States of the Union be urged to immediately make
          such appropriation as may be necessary for
          carrying out this purpose.


INTERNATIONAL ASPECTS OF SCOUTING.

Scouting as a world movement was represented in the summer of 1920 by
the International Scout Jamboree held at London, England, at which
delegates were present from 34 of the 53 nations in which scouting is
definitely established. The Boy Scouts of America were represented by a
group of about 250 scouts and scout leaders representing the whole
country. The gathering was most interesting and impressive in every way,
and the value of the scout movement in training boys to healthful,
useful activities by a program which is both educational and
recreational was triumphantly demonstrated. Aside from their
participation in the jamboree itself, the trip was of immense value to
our own boys, as it allowed of extensive visiting of points of interest
and historic association both in England and France, and in Belgium,
where the delegation was reviewed by King Albert, of Belgium.

At the invitation of the American Committee for Devastated France, the
National Council loaned its department of education director, Mr. Lorne
W. Barclay, to be in charge of the scout camp at Compiegne, France, on
the bank of the Aisne.


SCOUT HANDBOOKS, ORGANS, AND OTHER LITERATURE.

_Handbook for Boys._--The Handbook for Boys continues to be increasingly
in demand. Two or three printings of the book are required annually,
each printing including a 1,000,000 edition, to supply the demand for
what is said to be the most popular boy's book in the world. It is now
in its twenty-fourth edition and is the official interpretation of the
scout movement.

_Leaders' handbooks._--The new Scoutmaster's Handbook contains a wealth
of valuable material for scout leaders and other adults interested in
the movement. It is prepared by experts and based upon sound pedagogical
principles as well as good scouting. The new handbook for executives,
called Community Boy Leadership, is now in circulation and is proving
valuable.

_Magazines._--Boy's Life, the official scout magazine for boys, is a
live, wholesome, interesting publication issued monthly, containing
stories and articles by well-known authors and specialists.

_Scouting_, issued monthly, is prepared especially for scout leaders not
under council, while The Scout Executive, another monthly bulletin, is
directed chiefly to the field under council.

_Merit Badge pamphlets._--The editorial department of the Boy Scouts of
America has prepared and edited a series of valuable pamphlets in
connection with the Merit Badge subjects, which is filling a long-felt
want among scouts and others interested. There are 68 different
pamphlets, each written by a recognized authority in the respective
subject, and each submitted before printing to a large number of
experts, over 500 of whom were consulted for critical suggestion and
guidance. No effort has been spared to make these booklets accurate and
interesting. They contain over 3,000 pages of printed matter and over
800 illustrations, as well as valuable bibliographies and biographical
matter. The pamphlets have already attracted considerable favorable
notice among school men, and several colleges are placing the whole
series in their reference libraries.

A classified list of the subjects for which pamphlets have been issued
follows:


I. _Subjects that have to do with outdoor activities._

          1. Angling.
          2. Archery.
          3. Camping.
          4. Cooking.
          5. Cycling.
          6. Hiking.
          7. Horsemanship.
          8. Marksmanship.
          9. Pathfinding.
         10. Photography.
         11. Pioneering.
         12. Seamanship.
         13. Stalking.
         14. Swimming.


II. _Subjects that have to do with outdoor activities of a vocational
nature._

          1. Agriculture.
          2. Beekeeping.
          3. Bird study.
          4. Botany.
          5. Conservation.
          6. Dairying.
          7. Forestry.
          8. Gardening.
          9. Poultry keeping.
         10. Taxidermy.


III. _Subjects which have to do with modern application of mechanics._

          1. Automobiling.
          2. Aviation.
          3. Electricity.
          4. Machinery.
          5. Signaling.
          6. Wireless.


IV. _Subjects which have to do with the preservation of health and the
saving of life._

          1. Athletics.
          2. First Aid.
          3. First Aid to Animals.
          4. Firemanship.
          5. Life Saving.
          6. Personal Health.
          7. Physical Development.
          8. Public Health.
          9. Safety First.


V. _Subjects which have to do with so-called "Trades."_

          1. Blacksmithing.
          2. Carpentry.
          3. Craftsmanship, including Craftswork in
               Metal, Leather, Basketry, Pottery,
               Cement, Book-binding, Wood Carving.
               (7 separate pamphlets.)
          4. Handicraft.
          5. Leather working.
          6. Masonry.
          7. Mining.
          8. Plumbing.
          9. Printing.
         10. Surveying.

VI. _Subjects which have to do with knowledge gained mainly from books
and laboratories, under instructors._

          1. Astronomy.
          2. Chemistry.
          3. Business.
          4. Civics.
          5. Interpreting.
          6. Scholarship.

VII. _Subjects which have to do with some form of art._

          1. Architecture.
          2. Art.
          3. Music (including Bugling).
          4. Painting.
          5. Sculpture.

_Other literature._--The National Council also issues a large number of
other informational and interpretative publications, such as the Manual
of Customs and Drills, The Seascout Manual, What Every Scoutmaster Wants
to Know, Scouting and the Public Schools, Your Boy and Scouting, What
Scouts Do, Membership in the Boy Scouts of America, The Boy Scout
Movement (as approved by the Religious Education Association), etc.

_Cooperation with publishers._--The department during the year has
maintained through its director constant contact with publishers and
authors. More than 100 new books published for boys in 1919 have been
carefully examined (a good many in manuscript form) for review in Boys'
Life or inclusion in some one of our book lists and, of these, of the
few really good books for boys published in 1919, it is a joy to report
that more than half of these were first published serially in Boys'
Life, a record that stands alone.

_New books edited._--The director has edited as usual the Boy Scouts'
Year Book, compiled from last year's issues of Boys' Life, the sales of
which have been more than a third larger than in previous years. More
notable still has been the success of the Boy Scouts' Book of Stories, a
compilation of stories of interest to boys selected, one each, from the
writings of our best American and English short-story writers. The
purpose of the director in editing such a book was to interest boys in
stories that have the quality of fine writing, and so help to develop in
them a taste for literature that will make them lovers of the great and
good books of all ages. The very nature of the book warranted the
conclusion that it would take considerable time to make it a good
seller. Once again the unexpected has happened in that the first year's
sales of the Boy Scouts' Book of Stories has equaled the first year's
sale of the Boy Scouts' Year Book, and the present promise is that for
years to come this book will more than hold its own. In the coming year
material is being gathered for a companion volume to be published under
the title the Boy Scouts' Book of Stories in Verse.

_Motion pictures for scouts._--The director of the library department of
the National Council, Mr. Franklin K. Matthews, has served as a literary
adviser to a motion-picture company. As a result of this collaboration a
large number of educational and scout films have been put into
circulation, including the popular "Knights of the Square Table," by
Chief Seascout James A. Wilder. It is believed that these films offer
splendid opportunities not only to show the educational possibilities of
the scout movement but also to interest and instruct the public in the
joys and benefits of outdoor life, the necessity for safety first and
fire-prevention measures, and other features which are accentuated by
the scout program. The films can also be admirably used in connection
with the Americanization movement.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

This book uses both "Seascouting" and "Sea scouting" in their various
forms.

Page 7, "pracically" changed to "practically" (that practically no
uniform)







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Educational Work of the Boy Scouts, by 
Lorne W. Barclay

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EDUCATIONAL WORK OF THE BOY SCOUTS ***

***** This file should be named 29147.txt or 29147.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/1/4/29147/

Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
