Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, September 21, 1880, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Harper's Young People, September 21, 1880
       An Illustrated Weekly

Author: Various

Release Date: June 17, 2009 [EBook #29148]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE ***




Produced by Annie McGuire








[Illustration: HARPER'S

YOUNG PEOPLE

AN ILLUSTRATED WEEKLY.]

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. I.--NO. 47. PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK. PRICE FOUR
CENTS.

Tuesday, September 21, 1880. Copyright, 1880, by HARPER & BROTHERS.
$1.50 per Year, in Advance.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: TED AND KITTY MAKING A FIRE.]

HOW TED AND KITTY CAMPED OUT.

BY EMILY H. LELAND.


Kitty was eight years old, and Ted was seven. They had always lived on a
large farm, and knew all about birds and squirrels, and the different
kinds of trees, and how to make bonfires and little stone ovens; and
they could shoot with bows and arrows, and swim, and climb trees, and
split kindlings, and take care of chickens and ducks and turkeys, and do
a great many jolly and useful things which city children hardly get even
a chance to do. Well, once when they went on a visit with some cousins
to an uncle's on the other side of "Big Woodsy," as they called the
mountain, they did not get home that night.

The uncle thought they had gone home, and the father and mother thought
they had remained overnight at the uncle's. So nothing was done about it
until noon next day, when the uncle came jogging over on horseback to
look at a cow he thought of buying, and the mother asked him if Ted and
Kitty were not making too long a visit.

Then the uncle said, "Good gracious! they are not at our house; they
started for home last night, along with the Elderkins, I think."

Then the mother turned very pale, and said, in a faint voice, "They are
lost!"

"Oh no," said the uncle, "not a bit of it. The Elderkins coaxed 'em home
with them, of course. I'll ride round their way when I go back and start
'em home."

But the pale look wouldn't leave the mother's face, and in a short time
who should come but the Elderkins themselves, to spend the afternoon,
they said, with Ted and Kitty. Then there was a fright indeed. The
father walked down to the gate, and looked anxiously up the long winding
mountain road, as if that would do any good, and the mother followed
him, calling out,

"Oh, John! John! where _are_ our children?"

The uncle rode off in one direction, and the father quickly saddled a
horse and rode in another, to inquire at all the farm-houses if anything
had been seen of Ted and Kitty Curtis. And no one had seen them. All the
Elderkins had to say was that Ted and Kitty had told them there was a
nearer way to reach home than by following the dusty, roundabout road,
and they had run off through the woods to find it. The Elderkins chose
to follow the road, because they had on their new lawn dresses trimmed
with torchon, and "didn't want to get all scrambled up by the briers."

So while the uncle and the father and all the neighbors were hunting up
and down the forest, and the mother was staying in the house, with dear,
calm grandma and the little twin babies to keep her from going _quite_
crazy, I will tell you what Ted and Kitty were doing in the Big Woodsy.

After they had run on quite a way, the bushes and brambles began to be
so thick they were obliged to drop into a walk, and finally to climb and
crawl as best they might, for they never found the "nearer way," and the
ground was covered with fallen trees and rocks, while the briers caught
them sometimes as if they never meant to let go.

By-and-by the pleasant light of sunset began to fade away, and they sat
down to rest on a mossy log, and looked at each other very soberly.

"I don't know which way we ought to go," said Kitty.

"No more don't I," said Ted.

"Well, then, we must stay right where we are, 'stead of trying to go on.
'Cause, don't you know, lost people always go round and round and round
and never get anywhere, and just wear their shoes out, and get tired and
hungry, and nobody ever can find 'em. You ain't afraid, are you, Teddy?"

"No--o!" answered Ted, with scornful emphasis; "course not! Why, it's
only just camping out. We've always wanted to camp out, you know. An'
it's warm, an' there's but'nuts, an'--an'--maybe we'll find a pattridge
nest," and Ted looked around at the deepening shadows, and bravely
winked back the two tears that had gathered in his eyes.

"You know there isn't anything in these woods that can hurt us," said
Kitty, cheerfully. "Papa said there was no use for those hunters to come
here last year, 'cause there's nothing bigger'n woodchucks anywhere
round."

"But somebody killed a bear here the summer I was a baby," said Ted.

"Yes, but he was the last--the very last--and it's just as nice and safe
here as if we's camping out in our orchard. And let's fix up a house
right away. Let's play we've gone West and got some land of our own."

Then the two children went to work. They were scared a little, in spite
of their brave talk, but they were soon so interested in their
camp-building that they forgot their fear. First they cleared away the
sticks and stones beside the log where they were sitting. Then they
pulled large pieces of bark from a partly fallen tree, and leaned them
against the log, making a shelter large enough for a very small
sleeping-room. Over the bark they laid boughs of butternut and maple,
with long sticks placed crossways to keep them in place. Then by the
time they had gathered a few armfuls of dry leaves to place underneath,
it was quite dusk, and too late for any more work.

"Won't we get bugs in our ears?" asked Ted, peeping into the queer
little bedroom.

"Well, we'll tie our hankchifs over our ears. And we'll only take off
our shoes, 'cause we're just emigrants, you know."

"I--I wish it wasn't quite so dark," said Ted, faintly.

"But the moon will be up right away," said brave Kitty; "and maybe we'll
hear owls. We won't mind hearing owls, will we?"

"Course not," said Ted.

In a very short time the shoes were off, the handkerchiefs tied on, and
the two tired children cuddled up in their wigwam, with Kitty's apron
over their shoulders for a blanket.

"The Lord is here just as much as He's--He's in the Methodist church,"
said Kitty.

"Course He is," said Ted; and with this comforting thought they were
soon asleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

Morning came earlier in the woods than in the quiet bedrooms at home.
Birds were twittering around the little camp before sunrise, the breeze
blew noisily through the low-hanging branches, and the children were
awake before the night shadows were quite gone.

"Papa'll be sure to find us to-day," said Kitty, after they had crawled
out of their nest. "We must have all the emigrant fun we can, for we'll
only be Ted and Kitty after we get home."

"What do em'grants have for their breakfast, I wonder?" asked Ted.

"Oh, they--look around for things. Sometimes they have just butternuts,
I guess," answered Kitty, while she slipped on her shoes.

"Well, then, let's have but'nuts--and lots of them," said hungry Ted.

So Kitty, who was a nice tidy girl about everything, looked around until
she found a clean flat rock for a table; and while they were gathering
their breakfast from the nearest butternut-trees, they came across a
tiny little spring that bubbled out from under a ledge, and slipped away
in a small stream down the mountain-side.

"Oh, isn't it cute?" said Kitty. "We'll build our cabin right here, and
we'll play this is our water-power, and build a mill too. I'll be Mr.
Brown, and you may be the Co.--Brown & Co., you know."

After a good drink of the clear, cold water from a cup made of a
basswood leaf, they washed faces and hands, and went to the flat rock
for breakfast. The butternuts were not quite ripe; they stained fingers,
and they were hard to crack--with just a stone for a hammer--but there
were "lots of them," as Ted had requested.

All the long bright forenoon they worked about their water-power,
putting up an extensive mill of stones and sticks, and having no trouble
at all, except when Ted got tired of being called "Co.," and insisted on
being Mr. Brown a part of the time at least, in spite of Kitty's
argument that the youngest ought always to be Co.

So, about one o'clock, when their father and uncle were galloping here
and there in search of them, they were sitting at their rock table
cracking more nuts, and listening proudly to the mimic roar of the water
going over the dam they had just completed.

Sometimes they heard faint echoes and queer hootings off in the
distance. "We'll play it's Indians, and we're hiding from them," said
Kitty, never dreaming that all the men in the neighborhood of her home
were hunting and hallooing through the forest for two very lost
children. Once, when the shouts came quite near, the echoes mixed up
things, so that Kitty was almost frightened, and drew her brother into
the shelter of some thick bushes. "It sounds like a crazy man," she
said.

After a while the noise slowly died away down the mountain-side, and the
woods seemed more comfortable to Kitty. But sunset drew near, and still
there came no cheerful father-voice. The supper of butternuts was not a
very jolly one. Ted tried to be brave, but finally he dropped his face
into his elbow and wailed forth, "I want some bread and butter," and
cried loud and long.

"If we only had matches," sobbed Kitty, after Ted's cries had hushed a
little, "we could make a fire, and--and maybe find something to roast."

Ted stopped crying by trying very hard, and began to examine his
pockets. The prospect of a bonfire is cheering even to a hungry boy.
First a dull jackknife was laid on the rock, then two nails, then a
little rusty hinge, then a piece of slate-pencil, then a brass button
with an eagle on it, then more slate-pencil, then a piece of string
wound into a ball, then half of a match--the end that wouldn't go! Then
happily he thought of his inside pocket, and the hole that was in it!
Feeling along the lining of his jacket, there in its corner was
something which might be--yes, it _was_ a match!

"We won't care very much about it anyway," said experienced Kitty, "and
then it will be more apt to burn." Nevertheless, after they had piled up
some dry leaves, and laid birch "quirls" and small sticks over the top,
she struck the match across the sole of her shoe, shielded it with her
hand, and watched it anxiously. The little blue light quivered, paled,
almost went out, and then leaped cheerfully upon a dry leaf, and in an
instant the pile was alive with snaps and sparkles and dancing flames.
The children gave quite a merry shout.

"And now what'll we roast?" said poor Ted.

"We must fix the fire so it won't spread first," said Kitty; and she
carefully scraped away all the leaves and sticks that were near. Then
she took her brother's hand, and started to look for she hardly knew
what, but trying with all her motherly little heart to think of
something likely to be found in such a woods.

"Sour grapes roasted wouldn't be very nice, but maybe they'd be a sort
of a relish, you know, Ted;" and she stopped by a tree overgrown with
wild grapes, and began looking for the not very tempting clusters.

"Why, here are some that are nearly ripe. See! really purple a little."

Suddenly something alive sprang out of the brambles at their feet, and
whirred away with a tremendous rush.

"It's the pattridge nest, sure's you live!" said Ted, diving down among
the leaves; and after a minute's eager search they were found--two,
four, six, eight, nine speckled eggs in the cozy nest. "We'll leave one
for the poor pattridge to come back to, won't we Kit?" said Ted, swiftly
placing them in his hat.

More wood was piled upon the little fire, and they waited not very
patiently for hot ashes. The eggs were rolled up in large grape leaves,
and fastened with little twigs. The sun went down, and the fire-light
began to shine brightly on the overhanging boughs and the watchful faces
of the children. Finally Kitty said it must be time, and proceeded to
push away the blazing brands, and to roll the eggs in among the glowing
ashes. She had just covered them, after a fashion, with the stick she
used for a poker, and was saying to Ted they would soon be done, when
something came crashing along through the brush, and there was a man
with a scratched face and a torn coat, and a gun on his shoulder,
standing before them.

"Oh, papa," said Ted, after taking a second look at him, "mayn't we stay
until the pattridge eggs are done? 'Cause we're so hungry."

"Oh, you--rascals," was all the father could say; and he was either very
tired, or else Kitty rushed upon him and hugged his knees too
vigorously, for he sank right down on the ground, and commenced wiping
his face, and his eyes seemed to need a great deal of wiping.

"We didn't mean to camp out, papa," said Kitty, softly. "We only wanted
to go home the nearest way, and we couldn't find it at all; and so when
we found we were lost a little bit, we staid right where we were, so's
not to get any more lost. Wasn't that right, papa? We knew you'd find
us."

"Yes, an' we knew _you_ wouldn't come hollerin' round like crazy Ingins.
An' isn't the eggs done, Kit?" said Ted.

"Here's things to eat--things grandma fixed for you;" and the father
quickly opened a little bundle that hung at his side. "I was so glad to
see you alive, and having a good time, that I almost forgot your lunch,
you poor Hottentots."

The lunch was quickly disposed of, and after drinking two swallows
apiece of blackberry wine--which grandma sent word they must do--the
children "broke camp," and started for home, carrying the eggs in a
handkerchief.

"It was a good thing you started your fire, little folks. I was just
going to give up the mountain, and follow the others down to the creek,
when I saw a smoke curling up, and I remembered your weakness for
bonfires, and so-- Why, bless me! I've forgotten the signal." And the
happy father took his repeating rifle from his shoulder, and fired three
shots into the air.

Pop!--pop!--pop! That meant, "Found, and alive, and well." Three or four
guns answered from the valley below; and the mother and grandma, waiting
and listening by the farm-house gate, thought they had never heard such
sweet music in all their lives.

Only a quarter of a mile of very rough ground was travelled before the
children found themselves trotting along in the "nearer way" they had
tried to find the night before; and in an hour's time, after being much
kissed and very tenderly scolded, they were bathed and lying in their
clean, sweet beds, and Ted was sleepily saying to himself, "This is
nicer'n em'grants, after all."




OLD TIMES IN THE COLONIES.

BY CHARLES CARLETON COFFIN.


No. VI.

LOVEWELL'S FIGHT WITH THE PIGWACKETS.

At the southern base of the White Mountains, where the river Saco winds
through green meadows, was the home of the Pigwacket Indians. Their
chief was Paugus. During the years of peace he visited the English in
Maine, New Hampshire, and Massachusetts, and was well acquainted with
the settlers, but he liked the French better.

The Jesuit Father Rale, who had converted the Kennebec Indians, made his
influence felt over all the surrounding tribes, and Paugus, through his
influence, sided with the French. He could always obtain guns, powder,
and balls at Quebec and Montreal in exchange for furs.

From their wigwams on the Saco, it was easy for the Pigwackets to go
down that stream to the settlements in Maine, or going southwest to the
"Smile of the Great Spirit," as they called Lake Winnipiseogee, they
could descend the Merrimac to the settlements in Massachusetts.

In 1724 the Pigwackets killed two men at Dunstable. When the alarm was
given, eleven men started after them, but the Indians discovering them,
shot all but two, took their scalps, and returned to their wigwams on
the Saco, where they held a great feast over the successful raid,
dancing and howling through the night, and boasting of what they would
do on the next raid.

"I will give L100 for every Indian scalp," said the Governor of
Massachusetts.

The offer of such a bounty stimulated Captain John Lovewell, of
Dunstable, who started with eight men. It was midwinter, but the snow,
cold, and hardship did not deter the intrepid men, who made their way up
the valley of the Merrimac, and eastward to the country of the
Pigwackets. The sun was going down, on the 20th of February, when
Captain Lovewell discovered a smoke rising above the trees. He waited
till midnight, when, creeping forward alone, he could see ten Indians
asleep by a fire on the shore of a pond. He went back to his men, and
all moved forward. There was snow upon the ground, which broke the sound
of their footsteps. At a signal the guns flashed, and every Indian was
killed. It was a party who had just started to fall upon the English
settlements. They had new guns, ammunition, and blankets, which they had
obtained from the French in Canada.

It was a day of rejoicing in Dover when Captain Lovewell marched into
the village with the Indian scalps dangling from a pole.

"We will attack the Pigwackets in their home," said the men.

It was in April. The snow had disappeared, the trees were bursting into
leaf, when Captain Lovewell, with forty-six men, started up the valley
of the Merrimac once more. Three of the men, after marching about fifty
miles, became lame and returned home. The others turned eastward, passed
Lake Winnipiseogee, and came to Ossipee Lake--a beautiful sheet of
water.

One of the men was taken sick, and could not go on, and Captain Lovewell
built a little fort, and left there the surgeon and six men, with a
portion of the provisions. The rest of the party, thirty-four in all,
shouldered their packs and moved on in search of the Pigwackets. No one
knew exactly where their wigwams were located, and they moved cautiously
for fear of being surprised.

Captain Lovewell was a religious man, and every morning, before
starting, the soldiers kneeled or stood reverently with uncovered heads,
while the chaplain, Rev. Jonathan Frye, offered prayer.

The morning of May 19 came. They were on the shore of a pond, and the
chaplain was offering prayer, when they heard a gun, and looking across
the pond they saw an Indian on a rocky point on the other side of the
pond.

"We are discovered," said Lovewell. "Shall we go on, or return?"

"We have come to find the Indians," said the young chaplain. "We have
prayed God that we might find them. We had rather die for our country
than return without seeing them. If we go back, the people will call us
cowards." The company left their packs, and marched cautiously forward.

The Indians had discovered them--not the one who was shooting ducks; he
did not mistrust their presence; but a party had come upon their tracks,
and were following in their rear, and took possession of their packs.

Captain Lovewell moved toward the one Indian, who quickly fired upon the
white. His gun was loaded with shot, and Captain Lovewell and one of his
men were wounded. The Indian turned to run, but Ensign Whiting brought
him down.

"We will go back to our packs," said Lovewell; but when they reached the
place they found that the Indians had seized them, and that their
retreat was cut off by more than one hundred Pigwackets. The terrible
war-whoop rang through the forest, and the fight began, Indians and
white men alike sheltering themselves behind the trees and rocks,
watching an opportunity to pick each other off without exposing
themselves. All day long the contest went on, the Indians howling like
tigers. The white men saw that they were outnumbered three to one. It
must be victory or death.

Lieutenant Wyman was their commander in place of Lovewell, who was
mortally wounded. He was cool and brave.

[Illustration: "LIEUTENANT WYMAN, CREEPING UP, PUT A BULLET THROUGH
HIM."]

"Don't expose yourselves. Be careful of your ammunition." So cool and
deliberate was the aim of the white men that at nearly every shot an
Indian fell. They suffered so severely that they withdrew and held a
powwow with their "medicine man," who was going through his
incantations, when Lieutenant Wyman, creeping up, put a bullet through
him. The Indians, howling vengeance, returned to the fight; but the
white men, protected on one side by the pond, held their ground.

All through the afternoon the struggle went on.

"We will give you good quarter," shouted Paugus.

"We want no quarter, except at the muzzle of our guns," shouted Wyman.

Paugus had often been to Dunstable, and was well acquainted with John
Chamberlain. They fired at each other many times, till at last
Chamberlain sent a bullet through Paugus's head, killing him instantly.

"I am a dead man," said Solomon Keys. "I am wounded in three places." He
crawled down to the shore of the pond, found an Indian canoe, and crept
into it. The wind blew it out into the lake, and he was wafted to the
southern shore. The sun went down, and the Indians stole away. Pitiable
the condition of the settlers. Lovewell was dead, and also their beloved
chaplain, Jonathan Frye, who with his dying breath prayed aloud for
victory; Jacob Farrar was dying; Lieutenant Rollins and Robert Usher
could not last long; eleven others were badly wounded. There were only
eighteen left. The Indians had seized their packs; they had nothing to
eat; it was twenty miles from the little fort which they had built at
Ossipee; but they were victors. They had killed sixty or more Indians,
and had inflicted a defeat from which the Pigwackets never recovered.

"Load my gun, so that, when the Indians come to scalp me, I can kill one
more," said Lieutenant Rollins.

They must leave him. Sad the parting. In the darkness, guided by the
stars, they started. Four were so badly wounded that they could not go
on.

"Leave us," they said, "and save yourselves."

Twenty miles! How weary the way! They reach the fort to find it
deserted. They had left seven men there, but when the fight began one of
their number fled--a coward--and informed the seven that the party had
all been cut off, not a man left. Believing that he had told the truth,
they abandoned the fort, and returned to their homes.

Nothing to eat. But it was the month of May; the squirrels were out, and
they shot two and a partridge; they caught some fish; and so were saved
from starvation.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




[Begun in No. 46 of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, September 14.]

WHO WAS PAUL GRAYSON?

BY JOHN HABBERTON,

AUTHOR OF "HELEN'S BABIES."


CHAPTER II.

THE FIGHT.

The afternoon session of Mr. Morton's select school was but little more
promising of revelations about the new boy than the morning had been.
Most of the boys returned earlier than usual from their respective
dinners, and either hung about the school-room, staring at their new
companion, or waited at the foot of the stairs for him to come down. The
attentions of the first-named division soon became so distasteful to
the new-comer that he left the room abruptly, and went down the stairway
two steps at a time. At the door he found little Benny Mallow looking up
admiringly, and determining to practice that particular method of coming
down stairs the first Saturday that he could creep unnoticed through a
school-room window. But Benny was not one of those foolish boys who
forget the present while planning about the future. Paul Grayson had
barely reached the bottom step, when little Benny looked innocently up
into his face, and remarked, "Say!"

"Well?" Paul answered.

"You're the biggest boy in school," continued Benny. "I noticed it when
you stood beside Appleby."

Grayson looked as if he did not exactly see that the matter was worthy
of special remark.

"I," said Benny, "am the smallest boy--I am, really. If you don't
believe it, look at the other boys. I'll just run down the steps, and
stand beside some of them."

"Don't take that trouble," said Grayson, pleasantly. "But what is there
remarkable about my height and your shortness?"

"Oh, nothing," said Benny, looking down with some embarrassment, and
then looking up again--"only I thought maybe 'twas a good reason why we
should be friends."

"Why, so it is, little fellow," said Grayson. "I was very stupid not to
understand that without being told."

"All right, then," said Benny, evidently much relieved in mind.
"Anything you want to know I'll tell you--anything that I know myself,
that is. Because I'm little, you mustn't think I don't know everything
about this town, because I do. I know where you can fish for bass in a
place that no other boy knows anything about: what do you think of that?
I know a big black-walnut tree that no other boy ever saw; of course
there's no nuts on it now, but you can see last year's husks if you
like. Have you got a sister?"

Grayson suddenly looked quite sober, and answered, "No."

"I have," said Benny, "and she is the nicest girl in town. If you want
to know some of the bigger girls, I suppose you'll have to ask Appleby.
What's the use of big girls, though? They never play marbles with a
fellow, or have anything to trade. Say--I hope _you're_ not too big to
play marbles."

"Oh no," said Grayson; "I'll buy some, and we'll have a royal game."

"Don't do it," said Benny; "I've got a pocketful. Come on." And to the
great disgust of all the larger boys Benny led his new friend into the
school yard, scratched a ring on the dirt, divided his stock of marbles
into two equal portions, and gave one to Grayson; then both boys settled
themselves at a most exciting game, while all the others looked on in
wonder, with which considerable envy and jealousy were mixed up.

"That Benny Mallow is putting on more airs than so little a fellow can
carry; don't you think so?" said Sam Wardwell to Ned Johnston.

"I should say so," was the reply; "and that isn't all. The new fellow
isn't going to be thought much of in this school if he's going to allow
himself to belong to any youngster that chooses to take hold of him.
I'll tell you one thing: Joe Appleby's birthday party is to come off in
a few days, and I'll bet you a fish-line to a button that Master Benny
won't get near enough to it to smell the ice-cream. How will that make
the little upstart feel?"

"Awful--perfectly awful," said Sam, who, being very fond of ice-cream
himself, could not imagine a more terrible revenge than Harry had
suggested. Just then Bert Sharp sauntered up with his hands in his
pockets, his head craned forward as usual, and his eyes trying to get
along faster than his head.

"See here," said he, "if that new boy boards with the teacher, he's
going to tell everything he knows. I think somebody ought to let him
know what he'll get if he tries that little game. I'm not going to be
told on: I have a rough enough time of it now." Bert spoke feelingly,
for he was that afternoon to remain at school until he had recited from
memory four pages of history, as a punishment for his long truancy.

"Who's going to tell him, though?" asked Sam. "It should be some fellow
big enough to take care of himself, for Grayson looks as if he could be
lively."

[Illustration: "JUST IN TIME TO SEE GRAYSON GIVE BERT A BLOW ON THE
CHEST."]

"I'll do it myself," declared Bert, savagely; saying which he lounged
over toward the ring at which Benny and Grayson were playing. The boys
had seen Bert in such a mood before, so at once there was some whispered
cautions to look out for a fight. Before Bert had been a minute beside
the ring, Grayson accidentally brushed against him as, half stooping, he
followed his alley across the ring. Bert immediately got his hands out
of his pockets, and struck Grayson a blow on the back of the neck that
felled him to the ground. All the boys immediately rushed to the spot,
but before they had reached it the new pupil was on his feet, and the
teacher reached the window, bell in hand, just in time to see Grayson
give Bert a blow on the chest that caused the young man to go reeling
backward, and yell "Oh!" at the top of his voice. Then the bell rang
violently, and all of the boys but Bert Sharp hurried up stairs, Grayson
not even taking the trouble to look behind him. In the scramble toward
the seats Will Palmer found a chance to whisper to Ned Johnston,
"There's no nonsense about him, eh?"

And Ned replied, "He's splendid."

All of the boys seemed of Ned's opinion, for when Mr. Morton, just as
Bert Sharp entered, rang the school to order, and asked, "Who began that
fight?" there was a general reply of, "Bert Sharp."

"Sharp, Grayson, step to the front," commanded the teacher.

Bert shuffled forward with a very sullen face, while Grayson stalked up
so bravely that Benny Mallow risked getting a mark by kicking Sam
Wardwell's feet under the desk to attract his attention, and then
whispering, "Just look at that."

Before the teacher could speak to either of the two boys in front of
him, Grayson said, "I'm very sorry, sir, but I was knocked down for
nothing, unless it was brushing against him by mistake."

"Was that the cause, Sharp?" asked Mr. Morton.

Bert hung his head a little lower, which is a way that all boys have
when they are in the wrong; so the teacher did not question him any
farther, but said:

"Boys, Grayson is a stranger here. I know him to be a boy of good habits
and good manners, and I give you my word that if you have any trouble
with him, you will have to begin it yourselves. And if you expect to be
gentlemen when you grow up, you must learn now to treat strangers as you
would like to be treated if away from your own homes. Grayson, Sharp, go
to your seats."

"May I speak to Sharp, sir?" asked Grayson.

"Yes," said Mr. Morton.

"I'm sorry I hit you," said the new boy. "Will you shake hands and be
friends?"

[Illustration: THE RECONCILIATION.]

Bert looked up suspiciously without raising his head, but Grayson's hand
was outstretched, and as Bert did not know what else to do, he put out
his own hand, and then the two late enemies returned to their seats,
Bert looking less bad-tempered than usual, and Grayson looking quite
sober.

Somehow at the afternoon recess every boy treated Grayson as if he had
known him for years, and no one seemed to be jealous when Grayson
invited Bert to play marbles with him, and insisted on his late
adversary taking the first shot. But the teacher's remarks about
Grayson had only increased the curiosity of the boys about their new
comrade, and when Sam Wardwell remarked that old Mrs. Battle, with whom
the teacher and his pupil boarded, bought groceries nearly every evening
at his father's store, and he would just lounge about during the rest of
the afternoon and ask her about Grayson when she came in, at least six
other boys' offered to sit on a board pile near the store and wait for
information.

As for Grayson, he sat in the school-room writing while the teacher
waited, for more than an hour after the general dismissal, to hear Bert
Sharp recite those detestable four pages of history, and Bert was a
great deal slower at his task than he would have been if he had not had
to wonder why Grayson had to do so much writing.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




HOW A CRAB CHANGES HIS CLOTHES.

BY ALLAN FORMAN.


"Say, now, you leave my dinner alone, or I'll tell mamma."

"You can tell, if you have a mind to. I don't care, tell-tale."

No, it was not children that I heard quarrelling; it was only two little
crabs. Children never speak so crossly to each other; but those two
little crabs scolded and bit down there in the water until-- But I am
getting ahead of my story. I'll tell you how it was.

I had been out fishing, and as the sun became too hot, I rowed my boat
to the shore under the shade of the trees, and sat thinking. I looked
down into the water, and saw a little crab holding a clam shell under
his mouth with his claw, and eating as fast as he could, at the same
time turning his queer, bulging eyes in all directions to see that he
would not be disturbed. But soon another crab came up, and tried to
snatch away the clam shell. Then ensued the conversation which I have
already quoted. I dropped a piece of clam into the water, and the
new-comer seized it. He scuttled away under a piece of sea-weed, and
cried out in triumph:

"Aha! greedy, you didn't get it, and it is much better than your old
shell. Don't you wish you had it?"

"I'll change with you," said the other. "Just see this blue on the edge
of my shell. Ain't it lovely?"

"Change! I guess not. Who cares for the blue? You can't eat the blue."

"Of course you can't eat it, but it is pretty. However, there is no use
in talking to you about it; you have no love for the beautiful," said
the other, tauntingly.

"You needn't put on so many airs. I'm bigger than you are, anyway,"
snarled the first.

"You won't be long, for I'm growing every day."

"Children! children! what is the matter?" asked the old mamma crab, who
just appeared on the scene.

"Mamma, he tried to get my din--"

"I didn't; I only wanted--"

"He's a mean, horrid old thing, and I don't--"

"Why, children," interrupted the old crab, "I am ashamed of you. What is
the matter?"

"He tried to take away my dinner," said one.

"He said I wasn't growing big," said the other.

"That did not stop your growth, did it?" said mamma.

"No--o," drawled the little one.

"And now," she continued, "I want you to behave yourselves. Stop such
silly quarrelling. You act so much like boys and girls that I am ashamed
of you."

"Say, mamma, my clothes are getting too tight for me, and I've bursted a
seam in the back of my coat," said one of the youngsters, after a short
pause.

"That is all right," answered mamma, assuringly; "you are only going to
'shed.'"

"Am I going to be all soft and helpless, like papa was, and then be
taken away and not come back any more?"

"Oh no, I hope not. You must find a quiet place, and hide until you can
take care of yourself," answered mamma.

Accordingly the young crab wandered around, and found a nice quiet place
under the shadow of a large log; here he half buried himself in the mud,
and commenced the operation of changing his clothes. He swelled himself
out until the upper shell separated from the lower, then worked his
claws slowly backward and forward, and expanded and contracted the
muscles of his body; little by little he emerged from his shell, and
finally, with one effort, he freed himself entirely from his old
clothes. He lay back, exhausted by his exertions. While the crab is soft
it is perfectly helpless, and it can be handled without fear of bites.
When it first emerges from its shell it is covered with a skin as soft
and delicate as yours, but if left undisturbed it will soon harden. If
taken out of the water and kept in damp sea-weed, the process of
hardening can be delayed for three or four days, when it dies of
starvation, as it can eat nothing while soft, and that is the way in
which it is brought to the market. But the little crab I saw was
fortunate enough not to be disturbed. He lay perfectly still, and in
about an hour, if you could have put your finger on his back, you would
have felt that it had grown stiff and rough; in between three or four
hours the shell reaches the stage known as "paper shell." It is hard and
coarse, like brown paper, and the crab begins to show signs of
liveliness, and in about seven hours there is no perceptible difference
between our recently reclothed crab and his hard brothers and sisters;
but if you should catch him you would find him to be lighter in weight,
and watery when boiled, and the fat, which in a healthy crab is of a
bright yellow color, like the yolk of an egg, is a greenish-brown. But
no one had a chance to see the color of the fat in the crab which I was
watching, for just as he started to move, a great toad-fish came along
and swallowed him at one mouthful.




[Illustration]

[Illustration]

HALF AFRAID.




THE INVENTION OF STEEL PENS.


According to the following extract from a manuscript document in the
library of Aix-la-Chapelle, entitled "Historical Chronicle of
Aix-la-Chapelle, Second Book, year 1748," edited by the writer to the
Mayoralty, "Johann Janssen," it would appear that the invention of steel
pens is of older date than is commonly supposed. The paper referred to
says: "Just at the meeting of the Congress I may without boasting claim
the honor of having invented new pens. It is perhaps not an accident
that God should have inspired me at the present time with the idea of
making steel pens, for all the envoys here assembled have bought the
first that have been made, therewith, as may be hoped, to sign a treaty
of peace which, with God's blessing, shall be as permanent as the hard
steel with which it is written. Of these pens, as I have invented them,
no man hath before seen or heard; if kept clean and free from rust and
ink, they will continue fit for use for many years. Indeed, a man may
write twenty sheets of paper with one, and the last line would be
written as well as the first. They are now sent into every corner of the
world as a rare thing--to Spain, France, and England. Others will no
doubt make imitations of my pens, but I am the man who first invented
and made them. I have sold a great number of them, at home and abroad,
at one shilling each, and I dispose of them as quickly as I can make
them."




OUT IN THE STORM.

BY SIDNEY DAYRE.


"That story about the baby in the storm? Oh yes, I'll tell you all about
it. See, there's the scar on his dear little forehead yet--he'll carry
it all his life, they say--but I shall never get over being thankful he
came out of it so much better than I did, the darling."

And Janet glanced at her poor crooked arm as she settled herself more
comfortably for a long talk.

"This was the way it came about. Mother said to me one Saturday
afternoon, 'Janet, I am going over to the village; I will take the
little girls with me, and I want you to take good care of Harry till I
come back.'

"This arrangement did not suit me at all. I had other plans for the
afternoon, and I said, 'But, mother, I promised Mary Hathaway I would go
down there this afternoon. She is going to show me a new stitch for my
embroidery.'

"'I don't like to interfere with you, dear,' mother said, 'but it seems
to me you have been running there quite often this week, and I must have
your help now.'

"This was true, but it made no difference in the fact of my wanting to
go again.

"'Can't Bridget take care of him?' I said.

"'No, she has too much else to do.'

"'I hate being tied to babies all the time,' I snarled. 'I think we
might keep a nurse as well as the Hathaways. Mary never has to be
bothered with the young ones.' Mother looked at me with a look which
begged for something better from me, but I kept the scowl on my face
till I saw them drive from the gate. She said good-by to me with a
loving smile, which faded out, as I would not return it. Even when I saw
three hands waved to me as they turned the corner, some ugly thing at my
heart kept my hand down, although half a minute later I would have given
anything for a chance of answering mother's smile.

"I carried baby out into the grove at the back of the house, and dumped
him into the hammock, feeling cross and miserable enough. He sat there
cooing and crowing and laughing in a way which would have put a better
temper into any one but me. I sat on the ground beside him, fussing away
at my embroidery, but I could not get it right, and I got crosser and
crosser. At last Harry stretched over toward me, and took rather a rough
grasp of one of my ears and a good handful of hair with it. He did it to
pull my face around for a kiss, but as his pretty face came against mine
with a little bump, I jumped up and spoke sharply to him. I laid him
down with a shake, saying, 'Go to sleep now, you little tease.'

"He put up a grieved lip, and sobbed as I swung him. It was about the
time of his afternoon nap, and he was asleep in a few minutes.

"Then I tried my embroidery again, but it was no use--I could not get
the right stitch without some help from Mary. Then a thought came across
my mind--why could I not just run down there? Baby would surely sleep
for an hour, and I could easily be back within that time. He could not
possibly fall out of the hammock, for there were strings tied to some of
the cords, which could be fastened above him. I thought of telling
Bridget I was going, so she would have 'an eye out' in case he _should_
awake, but I knew she would be crabbed about it, and feel as if I were
imposing on her, even if he did not give a single 'peep.' So I tied him
in very carefully--he gave another little sob as I kissed him, and I was
so sorry I had been cross to him. In ten minutes more I was running in
at Mrs. Hathaway's gate.

"I had been going toward the north, so I did not notice that a black,
curiously shaped cloud, which lay low in the south as I left home, was
rising very fast. Mrs. Hathaway told me Mary was out in an arbor back of
the house, so I ran out there, and for a little while we were so deep in
the embroidery that I forgot to notice how dark it was getting. Then
there came a flash of lightning--oh, how white and terrible that
lightning was! It came all about us; we seemed wrapped up in it; and
such a burst of thunder as I never heard before or since. It sounded
like a cannon-ball falling right at our feet.

"As soon as we could move we flew into the house. I was wild with fright
as I saw the awful blackness in the sky. Great drops of rain began to
fall, and peal after peal of thunder came, as I snatched my bonnet and
rushed to the door. Mary seized my arm and held me back. She cried, 'You
must not go; indeed you _shall_ not go out in such a storm.'

"Mrs. Hathaway came up to me too, and put her arm around me. 'Why,
Janet, you can not go, my child. It might be at the risk of your life.'

"I think they almost meant to keep me by force, but I screamed out, 'I
_must_ go! I will! I will!' and I broke away from them, and rushed out
into that blinding storm. I couldn't think of anything except the poor
baby I had left all alone. There was no one there to take care of him,
no one knew where he was, and in the noise of the storm nobody could
hear him scream.

"The rain poured down in sheets by the time I reached Mrs. Hathaway's
gate. It seemed almost to beat me down to the ground, and the water was
over my shoes in half a minute. The lightning seemed like one long
flash, and the thunder never stopped. I staggered on and floundered on,
and slipped down and got up again, all the time just saying to myself,
'The baby! the baby!--if I could only reach him and find him alive!'

"Then it seemed as if night came down all at once. It got dark in one
minute, and I heard a horrible roaring sound behind me--louder than all
the thunder. I heard a long, rattling crash, and then another. It was
Mrs. Hathaway's house and barn going to pieces, but I didn't know it
then. I heard people scream; I heard all sorts of things whizzing about
me, but it was too dark to see much. Things came striking against me,
and soon a heavy thing came banging against me on one side, and just as
I was falling down something seemed to pick me up, and I was whirled and
twisted round and round, till I didn't know anything more.

"When I opened my eyes the rain was falling on my face. It was lighter,
and I saw boards and timbers, and trees and branches and bushes, lying
all about me. I was in a field not far from home. I felt dizzy, and
didn't remember anything at first, and then I thought of little Harry,
and sprang up to run to him. But, oh, how sick and sore I felt! When I
tried to lift a heavy branch which was lying partly over me, I could
raise only one of my arms.

"But my feet were all right, and I ran as fast as I could toward home. I
saw my father in the road in front of the house, looking up and down,
with a white, frightened face. He hurried toward me.

"'Where have you been, child?' he said. 'I must go to see if anything
has happened to your mother, but I could not go till I knew you and
Harry were safe-- Why, dear, you are hurt!'

"But I ran past him, crying, 'The baby, father, he's in the
hammock--come quick!'

"When we got round to the grove I screamed at what I saw. The trees lay
about as if a scythe had mown them down. I hardly knew the place, or
where to look for Harry.

"One of the trees the hammock was tied to was lying exactly where I had
left my little brother. Another tree was blown right across it. Father
did not stop to look, but called the hired man, and they brought axes
and saws. I stooped down and listened, though I felt sure the dear
little one must be dead. But I heard a sad little sob, as if he had
cried till he was worn out. I was so glad, I got up and danced. But
father shook his head and said, 'He's alive, but how do we know how he
may be hurt.' They chopped away at the branches, while I held my breath,
oh, how long, _long_ it seemed to wait! I crouched down and crept as
near the baby as I could. I called to him, and he gave a pitiful little
cry; he expected me to take him at once, and I was glad he got angry
because he had to wait. He tried to free himself from the hammock, and I
began to hope he might not be much hurt.

"At last a great branch was taken away, and I got closer to him. I
called father, and we looked under, and I heard him say, 'Thank God!'

"There the darling was, in a kind of little bower made by two big
branches which came down on each side of him. They had saved him when
the other tree fell. His forehead was scratched deeply, but nothing else
ailed him. Father reached in and cut away the hammock with his knife,
and drew him out with hands that shook as if he had an ague fit. The
little fellow held out his arms to me; but as I tried to take him my
strength all seemed to go away. I grew dizzy, and fell down. Bridget
took the child, and father carried me in and laid me on a bed.

"Then he and Bridget tried to get us into dry clothes. But I cried out
every time they touched me, till father was nearly at his wits' end. I
called aloud for mother. I knew she would not hurt me so.

"'I will go now and see where she is, dear,' father said at last, wiping
his forehead. 'The good Lord only knows where she may be--and the little
ones. I'll bring some one to help you, poor child.'

"The sun was shining brightly again by this time, but as I lay there,
with a great deal of pain in my arm and head, I seemed to feel that
black storm coming after me yet. The roar, roar, roar kept on in my
head, and the bed was whirling up in the clouds with me, and Mary
Hathaway was holding me, while some one pelted me with the stars; and
mother said, 'Oh, my poor darling--look at her head!'

"Then the moon peeped at me, and said, 'Her arm is broken in two
places.'

"It was the doctor who said this, and mother had really come to me.
After that I seemed to be climbing and climbing through trees--oh, so
long! I kept on for years, always hunting for little Harry, hearing him
cry for me, and never able to reach him. But at last I saw a light--I
had been in the dark all the time--and I struggled toward it, and looked
out. Mother was there, but not Harry.

"'Where is he?' I cried.

"'Who, dear?' she said.

"'Why, the baby--little Harry,' I said. 'I was almost up to him.'

"'Here he is.'

"She lifted him up to me, and I tried to take him, but I could not raise
myself, and was glad to find that I was in my own bed. I went off into a
long sleep, and when I awoke I didn't want anything except to lie quiet
and know mother was caring for me, and that Harry sometimes came
toddling into my room, for he had learned to walk during the long weeks
I had been sick.

"Well, that is about all there is of it. My arm was a long time getting
well, and will always be crooked, like this. The doctor said it would
have got entirely well if it had not been for the fever.

"But, dear me, how much thinking I did when my head got clear enough to
think! When I was out in the storm all I had ever heard about the wrath
of God on the children of disobedience seemed to come back to me. How I
was punished! If I had been faithful to my duty, I should have been safe
at home when the storm came. I shall always feel as if I knew something
of that awful wrath, for wasn't I taken up in God's terrible hand?

"When I was getting well I began to wonder why Mary Hathaway never came
to see me. Mother put off telling me as long as she could that she and a
younger sister had been killed in a moment by the falling of their
house, and that Mrs. Hathaway was crippled for life. None of us had been
hurt but me. Mother had got beyond the track of the worst part of the
storm, but her horse was killed by the lightning. Father lost his barns,
most of his stock, and nearly all his crops.

"That's the story of the terrible tornado. Its path was not more than
half a mile wide, and it was all over in less than half an hour. Mother
says I grew five years older on that day, and I think she is right."




"MOONSHINERS."

BY E. H. MILLER.


CHAPTER I.

CONNY LOSES HIS FATHER.

Dr. Hunter was riding leisurely on his morning rounds among the few
people who managed to be sick at Dunsmore in spite of the clear sweet
air that carried the balmy scent of the forests into all its pleasant
valleys. Under the seat of his sulky was his little old-fashioned box of
medicines, and close at his hand a tin box containing what was in the
doctor's eyes quite as valuable--a specimen of a rare plant which he had
discovered in a cleft of gray rock, and secured at the cost of some
pretty hard climbing. The road upon which he was driving wound along the
mountain-side, and he could look down upon the tops of the trees below,
noting here and there the scattered buildings and stacks of feed that
marked some little farm in a clearing, and from the very densest spot of
all a faint thread of blue smoke rising above the trees. He had often
noticed it, and more than once had asked about it, but no one gave him
any satisfactory answer. You would have supposed that of all the men and
women in Dunsmore not one had even chanced to see that smoke until the
doctor's eyes had spied it.

"Smoke, sor?--so it be," said old Timothy, with a great pretense of
straining his eyes to see it. "It's a fire in the woods, belike. Some
tramping fellows on a hunt."

"It is always in one spot," said the doctor, "though sometimes it
disappears for weeks. Is there any road that way?"

"Not the track of a squurl, yer honor. There's not a wilder bit in all
the State, I'm thinkin'."

"I believe one might find a way on horseback," said the doctor, "and I
shall try it some day."

"Ye'd best not do it. I'd be loath to see ye leaving a good trade for a
bad one." Timothy grasped his hickory cane, and shook his grizzled head
at the doctor. Then, coming a step nearer, he whispered,
"_Moonshiners_."

"To be sure," said the doctor, turning again to look at the smoke.

"It's a bad business," said Timothy, carefully studying the doctor's
face.

"Yes, it's a bad business, making whiskey, or selling it, or drinking
it; but paying a tax to the government does not make it any better. I
believe every dollar that comes to the government from such a source is
a curse."

Timothy drew a long breath.

"You're right, sor. I'm not beholden to the stuff myself; but yer
honor's done me a good turn, and I couldn't see ye bringin' trouble on
yerself by askin' too many questions. It mightn't be--pop'lar, sor."

The doctor asked no more questions, but he watched the blue smoke more
curiously than ever, wondering much about the outlaws who carried on
their secret trade in the mountain fastnesses. He had been thinking of
them that very morning as he rode along, with the reins lying loosely on
his knee, when suddenly Prince gave a start that roused his driver. A
small figure stepped out from the shadow of a rock, and stood close
beside the gig, saying,

"Would you come to my feyther, sir?"

"Who is your father?" asked the doctor.

"He's sick this three days," answered the boy.

"What is his name? Where do you live?"

"It's not far, sir," said the boy, without answering the question.

"Well, jump in here;" and the doctor held down his hand.

"Ye'll not be riding, sir; it's a bit off the road."

The doctor hesitated a moment, then fastened Prince securely in the edge
of the woods, and with his box in his hand prepared to follow his guide.

"Now, then, Johnny, go ahead."

"My name is Conny, sir," said the boy.

"Conny, is it? And what else?"

"Just Conny, sir;" and the boy led the way rapidly through what looked
like a pathless tangle, until below a sharp ledge of rocks they struck a
little stream by whose side they found a narrow but easy passage into
the very heart of the wood.

[Illustration: "THEY CAME UPON A SMALL WEATHER-BEATEN CABIN."]

"Surely no human being can live here," thought the doctor; but at that
very moment they came upon a small weather-beaten cabin, so low and gray
that one might easily have passed it unnoticed among the rocks that hung
over it, and the bushes that crowded around and in front of it. The
roof, thatched with bark, had fallen in at one end, and the place looked
as if it might have been forsaken for years. But the boy led him around
to the rear, and they entered quite a comfortable room, with a decent
bed in one corner, on which a man was lying with his face to the wall.

"Feyther," said the boy, "I've brought the doctor to ye."

The man neither moved nor answered, and the doctor, going up to the bed,
was shocked to see that he was dead. He turned to Conny and asked, "Has
your father been long sick?"

"Always sick, sir. He couldn't work at the North, and they told him if
he came here the air would cure him, and the smell of the trees, but he
coughed just the same."

"Where is your mother?"

"Dead, sir."

"And there is no one but you and your father?"

"Only us two, sir."

"Conny," said the doctor, slowly, "I am afraid your father is dead."

Conny did not answer for a moment, but his thin brown face settled into
a look of disappointment.

"He said he should die, sir, and nothing could save him, but I thought
maybe if you came-- Couldn't you try something? They brought Black Joe
round when he'd been long in the water, and was dead and cold--brought
him round with rubbing, and stuff they put in his mouth. Isn't there
something in your box that'll do it?"

"Nothing," said the doctor; "he is quite dead, my boy. You had better
come with me, and I will send some one to attend to your father."

But no persuasion could induce Conny to leave the cabin, and the doctor
was forced to return without him. For a quiet man, the doctor was
greatly excited over the mystery of the little cabin, but old Timothy
said, coolly, "That would be Sandy McConnell: one o' the moonshiners:
varmint, all on 'em."

"But, Timothy, some one must see that he has a decent burial, and if
you'll take a couple of men with you, and go down there--"

"Wait till to-morrow morning," said Timothy, significantly. "The birds
of the air 'tend to their own funerals."

A terrific storm that swept over the mountains that afternoon compelled
the doctor to follow Timothy's advice. The next morning, when they
succeeded, with much difficulty, in finding their way through the
tangle, the cabin was empty of every trace of human occupancy, and
almost seemed as if it might have been undisturbed since the
wood-choppers abandoned it. Under a great pine, a few rods away, they
found a new-made grave, carefully sodded, and bound over, in old-country
fashion, with green withes.

"The moonshiners have buried him," said Timothy. "I told ye, sor, they'd
see to their own funerals."

"I wish I knew what had become of the boy," said the doctor, as they
slowly picked their way upward; "he seemed such a quaint, old-fashioned
little chap."

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




[Illustration]




[Illustration: OUR POST-OFFICE BOX]


  BROOKLYN, NEW YORK.

     About the 1st of August I found some big worms crawling on an
     ailantus-tree in our yard. They were about two and a half inches
     long, of a pale green color, with white humps all over them, and
     beautiful blue spots on their heads. Mamma caught them for me, and
     we put them on a board with some ailantus leaves, and turned a
     large wire sieve over them. Every morning I gave them fresh leaves
     to eat, and in two or three days they began to spin themselves
     into cocoons. Some rolled themselves up in the leaves, while
     others clung to the side of the sieve, covering themselves at
     first with a thin white film, through which we could see the worm
     for half a day working himself back and forth. Then the film grew
     so thick we could not see the worm any more. When they had all
     formed cocoons mamma stood them away in a quiet place where
     nothing could injure them, and I went every morning to see if
     anything had come out of the cocoons. About three weeks passed,
     when one morning I found three magnificent moths clinging to the
     sieve. Mamma put ether on their heads, and they never moved again.
     She fastened them in a box for me, and arranged the wings, and
     they are just as beautiful as they can be. They spread about four
     inches. The color is reddish-brown, and across the middle of the
     wings there is a whitish line shading off into a clay-colored
     border. In the centre of each wing there is a long reddish-white
     spot, and on the tip of each fore-wing is a dark bluish eye. On
     the head are delicate feathered antennae. Mamma found a picture of
     the moth in a book. We are sure it belongs to the genus _Attacus_,
     and we think it is the kind called _Attacus promethia_.

  SARAH W. N.

       *       *       *       *       *

  EDNA, MINNESOTA.

     About a month ago a man caught a young whooping-crane, which I
     bought of him. It is now so tame that it will eat out of my hand,
     and come in the house and eat from the table, or drink out of the
     water pail. I keep him tied out back of the house by a string
     about two rods long, so that he can walk around. He is not a very
     small bird, if he is young. His neck is about two feet long, and
     his legs are very nearly the same length, and when he stands up
     straight he is about five feet high. He is not fully fledged yet.
     His body is now about as large as that of a goose.

     I like to write. I am not a very good writer, but I think I can be
     a better one if I write a great deal. I am the lame boy whose
     letters you printed in the Post-office Box last winter.

  ELMER R. BLANCHARD.

       *       *       *       *       *

  PHILADELPHIA, PENNSYLVANIA.

     Since my request for exchanges was published in YOUNG PEOPLE I
     have received a great many letters from all parts of the United
     States, and I would like to inform the correspondents that I will
     answer all of them in due time. Now I am very busy. I am getting a
     new book and fixing it up, my school has commenced, and I am
     taking music lessons on the piano. I can play familiar tunes like
     the "Racquet Polka," "Fatinitza," "Pinafore," and others. I am
     also taking German lessons.

  WILLIE H. SCHERZER.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Clarence L. can buy silk-worms, and obtain all information in
     regard to them, at the southwest corner of Juniper and Chestnut
     streets, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, or at the Educational
     Department of the Permanent Exhibition, in the same city.

  PAUL DE M.

       *       *       *       *       *

  ASHLAND, KENTUCKY.

     I have seen a real live white crow. It belongs to a gentleman
     living on Big Sandy River. The white crow was seen by several
     persons, who tried to shoot it. At last the gentleman who now owns
     it shot it in the wing. It was not much hurt, and soon got well.
     Its owner was offered three hundred dollars for it, but he would
     not sell it. A good many people go to see it.

  WILLIE S. B.

       *       *       *       *       *

  RADNOR, OHIO.

     I wish some correspondent would tell me how to feather arrows. I
     have made a bow and some nice arrows, but I can not feather them.

     I am making a collection of old coins. Are any other
     correspondents doing the same?

  B. I.

       *       *       *       *       *

  NEW YORK CITY.

     I like YOUNG PEOPLE very much. I am ten years old. I have no pets
     except a canary named David. I would like to know what to feed him
     with besides sugar and seed, for I think he must be tired of
     eating those all the time.

     I have a collection of stamps. I like the Post-office Box ever so
     much.

  ANN A. N.

Too much sugar is not good for your canary. You can vary his diet by
giving him a leaf of fresh lettuce about once a week, or a bit of hard
cracker to pick at. Whole oatmeal or grits, and a piece of apple or pear
occasionally, are healthy food. These tidbits must be given sparingly,
for if the bird eats them constantly it will grow so fat that it can not
sing. The staple food should be canary seed mixed with rape, and there
must always be a piece of cuttle-fish fastened in the cage.

       *       *       *       *       *

  MATTAPOISETT, MASSACHUSETTS.

     Here is a spelling game I invented, which may be played by two or
     more persons. The first player, who may be chosen by lot, proposes
     two letters, as, for example, c o. Then each player must in turn
     call a word beginning with those letters, as come. A player is
     beaten if he says a word beginning with any other than the letters
     named, or calls a word already given, or a meaningless word, or,
     when only two are playing, if his opponent makes two correct words
     while he is thinking of his. The addition of s is not considered
     to form a new word where it merely constitutes a plural.

     I made a salt-water aquarium five days ago, and it is all right. I
     have two eels, one minnow, and five other fish, some hermit-crabs,
     scallops, and periwinkles. I had a pipe-fish, but it died soon
     after I put it in. I use a small wash-tub for the aquarium, with
     sand on the bottom. I had two minnows at first, but this morning I
     found one on the floor, dead. What do you suppose made it jump
     out? There is sea-lettuce in the water, so there must be enough
     air. How long must the aquarium stand in the sun for the ulva to
     work? And with what shall I feed the crabs?

  W. A.

The directions in the paper on "A Salt-water Aquarium," in YOUNG PEOPLE
No 42, are as clear as it is possible to give them, but they must be
supplemented by experience, which, if you persevere, you will very soon
gain. The ulva will work in an hour's time when placed in the sun, as
you will see by the rising of the tiny air-bubbles, but it may be
necessary to renew the exposure to the sun for a short time each day,
always taking care that the temperature of the water is not too much
increased. If your crabs will not eat bits of clam, try them with tiny
mouthfuls of fish. Be careful to allow no uneaten food to remain in the
water. Experience, which you will quickly gain, will insure you success.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I have a great many German, French, Austrian, and English postage
     stamps, and would like to exchange with any who are beginning a
     collection. I can get all kinds of stamps.

     I am a native of England. I have been two years in America, and I
     think it is a very nice country.

  FRANK B. WESTWOOD,
  P. O. Box 4574, New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I am nearly twelve years old, and I like YOUNG PEOPLE very much.

     I am making a collection of postage stamps, and would like to
     exchange with any other boy.

     I can not get many kinds of stamps in this out-of-the-way place.

  HORACE RANDOLPH,
  Sherman, Grayson County, Texas.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I come from the far South, where I spend the winter in New
     Orleans. I am collecting postage stamps, and would like to
     exchange with any readers of YOUNG PEOPLE.

  EDWARD L. HUNT,
  Barrytown, Dutchess County, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I take HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, and think it is a splendid paper for
     boys and girls.

     I have a collection of postage stamps, and would like to exchange
     with any of the readers of YOUNG PEOPLE.

  HENRY A. BLAKESLEY,
  54 West Eighth Street, Topeka, Kansas.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I think YOUNG PEOPLE is the best paper that I ever read, and I
     think the Post-office Box is one of the nicest things in it.

     I am collecting relics and minerals, and would like to exchange
     petrified wood for relics. I will also exchange a
     chimney-swallow's egg for the egg of any bird except a robin, blue
     jay, or chipping sparrow.

  W. A. WEBSTER,
  394 Clinton Avenue, Brooklyn, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I would like to exchange birds' eggs with any of the readers of
     YOUNG PEOPLE. Correspondents will please state what kind of eggs
     they have to exchange, and what they would like in return.

  GUSSIE HARTMAN,
  65 Cass Street, Chicago, Illinois.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I would like to exchange postmarks for stamps with any of the
     readers of YOUNG PEOPLE.

  GEORGE G. OMERLY,
  616 Arch Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I must write, dear YOUNG PEOPLE, to tell you how I love you.
     Through you I have made the acquaintance of little "Wee Tot." I
     have sent her some Lake Michigan shells, and she has sent me some
     lovely ocean curiosities, some of which are star-fishes,
     sea-urchins, and beautiful shells.

     I would like to exchange slips of wax-plant, sweet-scented
     geranium, and fuchsias with any readers for more ocean
     curiosities, only I wish some one would please tell me how to send
     them safely.

  ANNA WIERUM,
  495 West Twelfth Street, Chicago, Illinois.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I like to read history, and about brave men, and I think "The
     Story of the American Navy" is splendid.

     I am collecting postage stamps, and have over one hundred
     duplicates, which I would like to exchange with the readers of
     YOUNG PEOPLE.

  ROBERT LAMP,
  Care of William Lamp, Madison, Wisconsin.

       *       *       *       *       *

     My sister takes YOUNG PEOPLE, and I read it every week. The story
     of "The Moral Pirates" was splendid. I work out all the puzzles,
     and read the stories and the letters.

     I would like to exchange stamps and birds' eggs with any of the
     readers of YOUNG PEOPLE.

  OSCAR RAUCHFUSS,
  Golconda, Pope County, Illinois.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I have been taking HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE from our news-dealer, and
     I find it a very interesting and instructive paper for the young.

     I will exchange foreign postage stamps and United States postage
     and revenue stamps with the readers of YOUNG PEOPLE.

  ALEXANDER A. REEVES,
  Emporia, Lyon County, Kansas.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I would like to exchange a specimen of the soil of Georgia for
     some of the soil of any other State.

  JAMES L. JOHNSON,
  76 Jones Street, Savannah, Georgia.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I am collecting birds' eggs, and have about one hundred varieties,
     but I need eggs of hawks, owls, eagles, whip-poor-wills, quails,
     partridges, prairie-hens, terns, snipes, plovers, gulls, finches,
     divers, loons, and other birds, and also the nest and egg of the
     humming-bird. I have a collection of nearly six hundred stamps,
     which I will exchange for birds' eggs or Indian relics.

  HARRY F. HAINES,
  1259 Waverley Place, Elizabeth, New Jersey.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Papa takes HARPER'S BAZAR, WEEKLY, and MAGAZINE for himself and
     mamma, and YOUNG PEOPLE for sister Mabel and me. We think it is a
     splendid little paper.

     I have twenty different kinds of flower seeds, and would like to
     exchange with some little girls in the far West and South.

  GRACE DENTON,
  114 Thirty-ninth Street, South Brooklyn,
  Kings County, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I shall be very grateful if any correspondents who can will send
     me specimens of minerals or fossil formations in exchange for the
     beautiful quartz crystals that we find imbedded in the rock at
     this place. I am also anxious to get some pretty shells,
     especially from the Southern and Western coasts. I will return any
     excess of postage on packages.

  SUSIE C. BENEDICT,
  Little Falls, Herkimer County, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I have a nice collection of curiosities, and if Ida B. D., of
     California, will kindly send me some shells from the Pacific
     coast, especially some abalone shells, and some sea-mosses, I will
     exchange any of my curiosities for them. My curiosities consist of
     stalactites, stalagmites, conglomerates, crystals, Indian
     arrow-heads (some of which are broken), gypsum, iron ore, and a
     great many pretty pebbles and stones that I find on the sand-bars
     along Green River. If she sends me any specimens, will she please
     mark the name and where each one is from?

  JOHN H. BARTLETT, Jun.,
  Greensburgh, Green County, Kentucky.

       *       *       *       *       *

JESSE HARGRAVE.--The poet alluded to by Scott in the forty-first chapter
of _The Heart of Mid-Lothian_, as "him of the laurel wreath," was Robert
Southey, who was appointed poet laureate of England in 1813. The lines
quoted are from Southey's poem of "Thalaba the Destroyer," eleventh
book, thirty-sixth stanza.

       *       *       *       *       *

W. W. S.--Many thanks for your kind attention in sending us the
interesting facts concerning the nesting of English sparrows in trees.
These little foreigners will pile the mass of dried grass, hair, and
other rubbish which composes their nest, on any ledge or shelf which
will support it, and if a decayed stump or deserted nest affords such
support, they are quite as ready to use it as they are to take
possession of the little houses which kind hands fasten to the branches
of trees. They will also build in woodbine and ivy, the strong branches
of which, clinging to the brick or stone wall, form a solid support,
quite as good as the ledge over a window or door. Almost any corner is
acceptable to these little fellows. A lady who had been absent from the
city during the summer, on returning home found one of her chamber
windows taken full possession of by the sparrows. The blinds had been
closed, and the space between them and the window was stuffed full of
rubbish, the birds using an open slat as an entrance to their cozy home.
We know of no instance where sparrows have woven an independent nest,
and fastened it to the branches of a tree, and for that reason we have
not classed them among birds that build their nests in trees.

       *       *       *       *       *

W., F., and S.--To make a boat scup set two upright posts firmly in the
ground about four or five feet apart. Connect them at the top by a
strong bar, across which at the centre fasten another bar at right
angles. The boat, which should have a seat at each end, is hung by four
stout ropes, one to each corner, so as to balance well, to the
connecting bar. A rope passing from each end of the cross-bar enables
the occupants to swing the boat forward and backward. The upright posts
should be well braced. If you can visit some park or picnic ground where
one of these swings is in operation, you will understand better how to
build one.

       *       *       *       *       *

WILLIAM F. S.--The coins you describe belong to the class known as
business tokens. They are issued by private parties, and are valueless.

       *       *       *       *       *

CLARENCE E. and F. B. W.--You can get the back numbers of YOUNG PEOPLE
you require by forwarding the necessary amount to the publishers, with
your full address. They will cost four cents for each copy.

       *       *       *       *       *

EDDIE DE LIMA.--The oldest text-book on arithmetic employing the Arabian
or Indian figures (those at present in use), and the decimal system, is
that of Avicenna, an Arabian physician who lived in Bokhara about A.D.
1000. It was found in manuscript in the library at Cairo, Egypt, and
contains, besides the rules for addition, subtraction, multiplication,
and division, many peculiar properties of numbers. It was not until the
seventeenth century that arithmetic became a regular branch of common
education.

       *       *       *       *       *

CAPTAIN FRANK.--The average price of a boy's bicycle is from twenty-five
to fifty dollars. Very small sizes may be obtained at a lower price.

       *       *       *       *       *

Favors are acknowledged from Lizzie Gieselberg, H. N. Dawson, John R.
Blake, C. D. Nicholas, Carrie Hard, Lilian McDowell, Nellie Rossman,
Henry Coleman, Annie M. Douglas, Aggie M. Mason, Madgie W. B., Sallie R.
Ely, Dora Williams, M. W. D., Mary McWhorter.

       *       *       *       *       *

Correct answers to puzzles are received from Olive Russell, "Chiquot,"
Minnie H. Ingham, Sidney Abenheim, Emma Shaffer, Edward L. Hunt, Allie
Maxwell, George Volckhausen.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUZZLES FROM YOUNG CONTRIBUTORS.

No. 1.

UNITED DIAMONDS.

1. In September. An ancient water vessel. An article of food. A domestic
animal. In December.

2. In February. A part of the body. A product. To blend. In August.
Centrals of diamonds read across give a valuable natural product much
used in the East Indies.

  HENRY.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 2.

ENIGMA.

  My first is in empty, but not in full.
  My second is in rope, but not in pull.
  My third is in light, but not in dark.
  My fourth is in silent, but not in hark.
  My fifth is in drop, but not in fall.
  My sixth is in high, but not in tall.
  My seventh is in stool, but not in chair.
  My eighth is in mend, but not in tear.
  My ninth is in circle, but not in ring.
  My whole is a new and wonderful thing.

  S. T. H.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 3.

NUMERICAL CHARADES.

1. I am an ancient Greek astronomer composed of 10 letters. My 1, 2, 3
is a part of the body. My 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 is to dry up. My 9, 10 is a
pronoun.

  F. W.

2. I am an ancient Greek comedian composed of 10 letters. My 1, 2, 3, 4
is a poetic narrative. My 5, 6, 7, 8 is injury. My 9, 10 is a pronoun.

3. I am an ancient Greek historian composed of 9 letters. My 1, 2, 3, 4
is a great warrior. My 5, 6, 7 is a small spot. My 8, 9 is a pronoun.

  S. C. H.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 4.

WORD SQUARES.

1. First, froth. Second, one of the United States. Third, designs.
Fourth, a vegetable growth.

  FRANK.

2. First, a ship famous in ancient legend. Second, to harvest. Third,
festive. Fourth, a precious stone.

  LUCY.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANSWERS TO PUZZLES IN NO. 44.

No. 1.

Esquimau.

No. 2.

  S T E M
  T O G A
  E G E R
  M A R K

No. 3.

  R  ocheste   R
  H indoo-Coos H
  O     b      I
  N    anki    N
  E     ri     E

Rhone, Rhine.

No. 4.

Chair, hair, air.

No. 5.

      R
    N U T
  R U L E R
    T E N
      R

No. 6.

1. Hyacinth. 2. Androscoggin.




ADVERTISEMENTS.




HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE.

HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE will be issued every Tuesday, and may be had at
the following rates--_payable in advance, postage free_:

  SINGLE COPIES                     $0.04
  ONE SUBSCRIPTION, _one year_       1.50
  FIVE SUBSCRIPTIONS, _one year_     7.00

Subscriptions may begin with any Number. When no time is specified, it
will be understood that the subscriber desires to commence with the
Number issued after the receipt of order.

Remittances should be made by POST-OFFICE MONEY ORDER or DRAFT, to avoid
risk of loss.

ADVERTISING.

The extent and character of the circulation of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE
will render it a first-class medium for advertising. A limited number of
approved advertisements will be inserted on two inside pages at 75 cents
per line.

  Address
  HARPER & BROTHERS,
  Franklin Square, N. Y.




OUR CHILDREN'S SONGS.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our Children's Songs. Illustrated. 8vo, Ornamental Cover, $1.00.

       *       *       *       *       *

It contains some of the most beautiful thoughts for children that ever
found vent in poesy, and beautiful "pictures to match."--_Chicago
Evening Journal._

This is a large collection of songs for the nursery, for childhood, for
boys and for girls, and sacred songs for all. The range of subjects is a
wide one, and the book is handsomely illustrated.--_Philadelphia
Ledger._

Songs for the nursery, songs for childhood, for girlhood, boyhood,
and sacred songs--the whole melody of childhood and youth bound in
one cover. Full of lovely pictures; sweet mother and baby faces;
charming bits of scenery, and the dear old Bible story-telling
pictures.--_Churchman_, N. Y.

The best compilation of songs for the children that we have ever
seen.--_New Bedford Mercury._

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.

HARPER & BROTHERS _will send the above work by mail, postage prepaid, to
any part of the United States, on receipt of the price_.




COLUMBIA BICYCLE.

[Illustration]

Bicycle riding is the best as well as the healthiest of out-door sports;
is easily learned and never forgotten. Send 3c. stamp for 24-page
Illustrated Catalogue, containing Price-Lists and full information.

THE POPE MFG. CO.,

79 Summer St., Boston, Mass.




CHILDREN'S

PICTURE-BOOKS.

     Square 4to, about 300 pages each, beautifully printed on Tinted
     Paper, embellished with many Illustrations, bound in Cloth, $1.50
     per volume.

The Children's Picture-Book of Sagacity of Animals.

     With Sixty Illustrations by HARRISON WEIR.

The Children's Bible Picture-Book.

     With Eighty Illustrations, from Designs by STEINLE, OVERBECK,
     VEIT, SCHNORR, &c.

The Children's Picture Fable-Book.

     Containing One Hundred and Sixty Fables. With Sixty Illustrations
     by HARRISON WEIR.

The Children's Picture-Book of Birds.

     With Sixty-one Illustrations by W. HARVEY.

The Children's Picture-Book of Quadrupeds and other Mammalia.

     With Sixty-one Illustrations by W. HARVEY.

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.

_Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any part of the United States, on
receipt of the price._




The Child's Book of Nature.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Child's Book of Nature, for the Use of Families and Schools:
intended to aid Mothers and Teachers in Training Children in the
Observation of Nature. In Three Parts. Part I. Plants. Part II. Animals.
Part III. Air, Water, Heat, Light, &c. By WORTHINGTON HOOKER, M.D.
Illustrated. The Three Parts complete in One Volume, Small 4to, Half
Leather, $1.12; or, separately, in Cloth, Part I., 45 cents; Part II.,
48 cents; Part III., 48 cents.

       *       *       *       *       *

A beautiful and useful work. It presents a general survey of the kingdom
of nature in a manner adapted to attract the attention of the child, and
at the same time to furnish him with accurate and important scientific
information. While the work is well suited as a class-book for schools,
its fresh and simple style cannot fail to render it a great favorite for
family reading.

The Three Parts of this book can be had in separate volumes by those who
desire it. This will be advisable when the book is to be used in
teaching quite young children, especially in schools.

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.

_Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any part of the United States, on
receipt of the price._




[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

WALTZING FAIRY.


A very pretty toy, and easily made, is this Waltzing Fairy. It may be
familiar to some of our readers, but will be new to a great many more.

Cut a doll out of a good-sized cork--one from a Champagne bottle is
best, because broader at the base; into this base insert a number of
stout bristles, as in Fig. 1. If you can not procure bristles, fine
broom-corn will answer the purpose.

Dress this cork body (Fig. 2), taking care to make the dress just so
long that it will not touch the ground. Place this doll on the top or
sounding-board of the piano when any one is playing, and it will dance
about in a very graceful manner.

If placed on a smooth tea-tray, and the tray tilted a little at one end,
the doll will waltz across the tray in lady-like style.




CHARADE.


I.

  A gentleman once, with his children and wife,
    Fled away from a town that was burning,
  By command of a friend, who added that life
    Must depend on their never back turning.
  The lady, alas! like her grandmother Eve,
    With a longing for knowledge is curst:
  She turns to behold--it is hard to believe--
    And is pillared straightway in my _first_.

II.

  An elderly female in gorgeous array
    Promenades in the streets of Verona;
  She is seeking a heart, which has wandered astray,
    To the serious loss of its owner.
  _Her_ heart is all safe; but her sense of her charms
    Is still great--for what woman e'er lost it?--
  So my _second_ precedes her t'allay her alarms,
    And to speak in her stead if accosted.

III.

  The battle's done; the chieftain's in his tent,
    And glories in the victory he has won.
  He dreams of plaudits by his sovereign sent--
    When, lo! appears a curled perfumed one,
  Who claims to be the herald from the King;
    Who prates of war, though ne'er a squadron led;
  And says but for my _whole_--the villainous thing--
    He too had worn a helmet on his head.

       *       *       *       *       *

=How Salt was formerly Made.=--The art of making salt was known in very
early times to the Gauls and the Germans. The process was very simple,
for they did nothing more than throw the salt-water on burning wood,
where it evaporated, and left the salt adhering to the ashes or
charcoal. The ancient Britons probably extracted the salt by the same
method, for in the Cheshire salt-springs pieces of half-burned wood have
been frequently dug up. The Romans made salt a source of revenue six
hundred and forty years before the birth of Christ. Part of the pay of
the Roman soldiers was made in salt, which was thus called _salarium_,
whence we derive the word "salary."




THE MARINER'S PUZZLE.


[Illustration]

A mariner at sea discovered, while in a storm, that a square hole had
been made in the bow of his ship by the displacement of a piece of
plank. This must be immediately closed to stop the inflow of water. The
only piece of plank he had on board was in the form of two connected
squares, as represented in the annexed diagram.

Either of these squares was too small to fill the space, but the two
parts, reduced to one single square, would give him a plank of the size
required. This he obtained by making two straight cuts with his saw
through the plank.

In what direction were the cuts made?




MEADOW-QUAKERS.


  In the early autumn
  Come the Meadow-Quakers;
  Not the Shakers, not the Shakers--
      No, no, no.
  These quiet little people
  Stand straight as a church steeple,
  And no one ever saw them come
      Or ever saw them go.

  White their hats and broad-brimmed,
  Lined with pale pink lining,
  On them dew-drops often shining--
      Yes, yes, yes.
  No butterfly goes near them,
  No brown bee hums to cheer them,
  And what these Quaker folks are called
      I want you all to guess.




[Illustration: "Oh dear! I went to catch a little Fly, and the naughty
thing had a pin in its tail."

[_Continuation of sobs._]]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Harper's Young People, September 21,
1880, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE ***

***** This file should be named 29148.txt or 29148.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/1/4/29148/

Produced by Annie McGuire

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
