The Project Gutenberg EBook of Poppy's Presents, by Mrs O. F. Walton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Poppy's Presents

Author: Mrs O. F. Walton

Release Date: June 18, 2009 [EBook #29153]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POPPY'S PRESENTS ***




Produced by Nick Wall, Nadine Margaret Whitcombe and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






[Illustration: [_See p._ 35.]




     POPPY'S PRESENTS
     BY
     MRS. WALTON

     _Author of 'Christie's Old Organ,' 'A Peep Behind the Scenes,' etc._

     London
     THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY

     56, PATERNOSTER ROW; AND 65, ST. PAUL'S CHURCHYARD


     BUTLER & TANNER,
     THE SELWOOD PRINTING WORKS,
     FROME, AND LONDON.




CONTENTS.


        I.  THE LITTLE RED CLOAK             7

       II.  POPPY'S WORK                    18

      III.  A HOLIDAY                       26

       IV.  A LONG NIGHT                    35

        V.  FOUND AT LAST                   44

       VI.  POPPY WRITES A LETTER           53

      VII.  A VISIT FROM GRANDMOTHER        63

     VIII.  JACKY AND JEMMY                 71

       IX.  JOHN HENRY'S BAIRN              81

        X.  THE MOTHER'S LEGACY             90

       XI.  THE STORY OF THE RING          100

      XII.  THE WONDERFUL FIRE             112

     XIII.  POPPY'S FATHER COMES HOME      119




CHAPTER I.

THE LITTLE RED CLOAK.


The great cathedral bell was striking twelve. Slowly and solemnly it
struck, and as it did so people looked at their watches and altered
their clocks, for every one in the great city kept time by that grave
old bell. Every one liked to hear it strike; but the school children
liked it best of all, for they knew that with the last stroke of twelve
lessons would be over, and they would be able to run home to dinner.

'Good morning, children,' said Miss Benson, the mistress.

'Good morning, ma'am,' said the girls, and then they marched out like
soldiers in single file. So quiet they were, so grave, so orderly they
went, almost as solemnly as the old bell itself.

But only till they reached the school door. Then they broke up into a
merry noisy crowd, running and shouting, chasing each other from side to
side, jumping, hopping, and skipping as they went down the street.

'Oh dear, what a noise them children do make!' said old Mrs. North, as
she got up and shut her cottage door.

But the noise soon died away, for the children were hungry, and they
were hurrying home to dinner.

What is that little bit of red that we see in front of the crowd? It is
a little girl in a scarlet cloak, and she is turning down a long
straight road which leads into the heart of the city. Let us follow her
and see where she is going. She is very tidily dressed; there is a clean
white holland pinafore under the scarlet cloak, and although her shoes
are old, they are well patched and mended. But she is turning into a
very poor part of the city--the streets are getting narrower and more
crowded, and they are getting darker, too, for the quaint, old-fashioned
houses overhang the pavement, and so nearly meet overhead, that very
little light or air can get into the dismal street below.

Still on and on goes the little red cloak. And now she is turning down a
court on the left-hand side of the street. An open court it ought to be,
with a row of houses on each side, and an open space in the middle; but
it is not an open space to-day, for it is everybody's washing-day in
Grey Friars Court, and long lines are stretched from side to side, and
shirts and petticoats and stockings and all manner of garments are
waving in the breeze.

The little red cloak threads her way underneath; sometimes the corner of
a wet towel hits her in the face, sometimes she has to bend almost
double to get underneath a dripping blanket or sheet. But she makes her
way through them all, and passes on to the last house in that long
dingy court, and as she does so she notices a little crowd of women
standing by her mother's door. There is old Mrs. Smith leaning on her
crutches, and Sarah Anne Spavin and her mother, and Mrs. Lee with her
baby in her arms, and Mrs. Holliday, with Tommy and Freddy and Ann
Eliza. And as she looks up she sees several faces looking out of the
windows overhead.

What could be the matter? Had anything happened to her mother? Was her
mother dead? That was her first thought, poor child. But nobody was
looking particularly grave, and they laughed as they caught sight of the
little red cloak coming under the white sheets and table-cloths.

'Why, here's Poppy!' said Mrs. Holliday, as she came up to them.

'Well, Poppy,' cried another, 'have you heard the news?'

'Your mother's got a present for you, Poppy,' said Sarah Anne Spavin;
'you'd better hurry in and have a look at it.'

'A present for me,' said the child; 'what is it?'

But the women only laughed and bade her go and see.

And the faces at the window overhead laughed too, and said there was
such a thing as having too much of a good thing.

Poppy passed them all and went in, and then she heard her mother's voice
calling to her to come upstairs. Her mother was in bed, and she beckoned
Poppy to come up to her.

'Poppy, child,' she said, rather sorrowfully, 'I've got a present for
you.'

Just what the neighbours had told her; and the child wondered more and
more what this present could be. It was a very long time now since Poppy
had had a present; she had never had one since her father went away, and
it was six months since he had left them.

Poppy often wondered where he had gone. Her mother never talked about
him now, and the neighbours shook their heads when he was mentioned,
and said he was a bad man. But he had often brought Poppy a present on a
Saturday night when he got his wages; sometimes he brought her a packet
of sweets, sometimes an apple, and once a beautiful box of dolls'
tea-things. But since he went away there had been no presents for Poppy.
Her mother had had to work very hard to get enough money to pay the rent
and to get bread for them to eat--there was no money to spare for
anything else.

What could this present be, about which all the neighbours knew?

'Look here, Poppy,' said her mother; and she pointed to a little bundle
of flannel lying on one side of the bed.

Poppy went round and peeped into it; and there she saw her present--a
tiny baby with a very red face and a quantity of black hair, and with
its little fists holding its small fat cheeks.

'Oh, what a beauty!' said Poppy, in an awestruck voice. 'Is it for me,
mother?'

'Yes,' said the mother, with a sigh; 'it's for you, Poppy.'

'But that isn't all,' said old Mrs. Trundle, who was standing at the
foot of the bed; 'that's only half your present, Poppy. Look here!'

And in her arms Poppy saw another bundle, and when she had opened it, lo
and behold, what should there be but another little baby, also with a
very red face and plenty of black hair, and with its little fists
holding its fat cheeks!

'Two of them?' said Poppy, in amazement. 'Are you sure they are both for
us, mother?'

'Yes, they are both for us,' said the poor woman; 'both for us, Poppy.'

'Who sent them?' asked the child.

'God sent them, poor little things!' said her mother, looking
sorrowfully at the two little bundles.

'Are they God's presents to me?' asked Poppy.

'Yes, to you and to me, Poppy,' said her mother; 'there's nobody else
to look after them.'

'Ay, you'll have your work set now, Poppy,' said old Mrs. Trundle.

But Poppy did not think of the work just then. Two dear little babies!
And for her own! She was very very happy. She could scarcely eat any
dinner, although Mrs. Lee took her across the court into her house, that
she might get some with her children, and it was a great trial to her
when her mother told her she must go back to school as usual.

'You'll get little enough schooling now, go while you may, Poppy,' she
said.

The excitement in the court was not over when the child passed down it
on her way to school.

The neighbours came to their doors when they caught sight of her red
cloak, and some of them said, 'Poor Poppy!' and some of them shook their
heads mournfully without saying anything. The child could not understand
why they all pitied her so much. She thought they ought to be glad that
such a nice present had come for her.

On her way to school Poppy passed under a curious old gateway, which had
been built many hundred years ago, and which still stood in the old wall
of the city. Under the shadow of this ancient Bar was a shop--such a
pretty shop Poppy thought it, and it was very seldom that she went under
the gateway without stopping to look in at the window. For there,
sitting in a row, and looking out at her, were a number of
dolls--beautiful wax dolls with curly hair and blue eyes and pink
cheeks. And Poppy had never had a wax doll of her own. Her only doll was
an old wooden creature with no real hair, and with long straight arms;
she could never even sit down, for her back and her legs would not bend,
and when Poppy came home and looked at her after she had been gazing in
the toy-shop window she thought her very ugly indeed.

One day when Poppy was standing under the Bar, a lady and a little girl
came up to the shop. The little girl was just as tall as Poppy, and she
stood beside her gazing at the row of dolls.

'I should like that one, mother,' she said; 'the one with yellow hair
and a red necklace.'

That was Poppy's favourite too; _she_ would have chosen that one, she
said to herself.

The lady had gone into the shop and bought the doll, and Poppy watched
the happy little girl walk away with it in her arms. And then poor Poppy
went into a dark corner under the Bar, and cried a little to herself
before she went on to school. If only _her_ mother had money enough to
buy her a wax doll!

But on the day Poppy's presents came she did not even stop for a moment
to look at the wax dolls. What stupid creatures they seemed to her now!
_Her_ babies could open and shut their eyes, and none of these dolls
could do that.

_Her_ babies could move, and yawn, and cry, and kick; they were far
better than dolls.

And mother said God had sent them! He must have known how much she had
wanted one of those wax dolls, Poppy thought.




CHAPTER II.

POPPY'S WORK.


Poppy's work soon began in good earnest. Her mother had to go out to
work, and whilst she was away there was no one but Poppy to take care of
the babies. She liked her work very much at first. Their eyes were as
blue as those of the wax dolls in the shop window, and their hair was
quite as pretty.

But, as the days went by, Poppy could not help wishing that her babies
would sometimes be as quiet as the row of dolls in the shop under the
Bar. Poppy's babies were never quiet, except when they were asleep, and
unfortunately it was very seldom that they were both asleep at the same
time. Poor little Poppy! her small arms ached very often as she carried
those restless babies, and sometimes she felt so tired she thought she
must let them fall.

Oh, how they cried! Sometimes they went on hour after hour without
stopping. And then at length, one baby would fall asleep quite tired
out, but no sooner did its weary little cry cease than the other one
would scream more loudly than before, and would wake it up again.

There was no end to Poppy's work. She was warming milk and filling
bottles,--she was pacing up and down the room,--she was singing all the
hymns she had learned at school to soothe them to sleep,--she was
nursing and patting, and rocking her babies from morning till night.

Brave little Poppy! The tears would come in her eyes sometimes, when the
babies were more cross than usual, and she would think how nice it would
be to feel rested sometimes; she was always so tired now. But she never
gave up her work; she would not have left her babies for the world; she
loved them through it all.

Even when her mother came home in the evening Poppy's work was not
finished. Poor tired mother, she came slowly and wearily up the court,
and then sank down upon a chair just inside the door, almost too
exhausted to speak.

'Give me the babies, Poppy darling,' she would say.

But Poppy knew that her mother had been standing all the day at a
washing-tub, and that she was almost too tired to speak, and so she
would say, 'Oh, I'll keep them a bit, mother; get a cup of tea first.'

And so the evening wore away, and bedtime came; the time when most
little girls of Poppy's age get into soft, cosy beds, and sleep
peacefully till the sunbeams wake them gently in the morning. But even
at night Poppy's work was not over. One or other of the babies was
crying nearly all the night, and sometimes both were crying together.
Poppy used to see her poor mother pacing up and down, backwards and
forwards on the bedroom floor, trying to hush one of the fretful
children to sleep. And then she would creep out of bed and say, 'Give it
to me, mother, you are so tired and so cold.'

And then Poppy would take her turn in that constant tramp, tramp across
the floor, and at last, when the happy moment came, if it ever did come,
in which both babies were worn out with crying and were laid asleep
beside her mother, Poppy would creep cold and shivering into bed, and
the night would seem all too short for her.

Yet, in spite of all the work the babies gave her, Poppy was very proud
of her presents. And when her mother got out two white frocks which
Poppy had worn when she was a baby, and dressed the poor little twins in
them one Sunday afternoon, Poppy danced for joy.

'Don't they look lovely, mother?' she said.

'You must pray for them, Poppy, when we get to church,' said her mother.
'We are going to give them to God.'

'What will He do with them, mother?' said Poppy. 'He won't take them
away, will He?'

'No,' said her mother, 'He won't take them away just yet; but I want
them to belong to Him as long as they live, and then He'll take them
home by-and-by.'

Poppy was very attentive at church that day. How pretty her babies
looked as the clergyman took them in his arms! Her mother had been very
anxious that they should have Bible names, and after much searching, and
after many long talks with Poppy on the subject, she had fixed on Enoch
and Elijah as the names for the little brothers.

Poppy was very happy that Sunday as she walked home with little Enoch in
her arms. But when they got into the house, her mother sat down and
burst into tears.

'What is it, mother dear?' said the child. 'Are you tired?'

'No, my dear, it isn't that,' she said. 'I'll tell you some time when
the babies are asleep.'

They were asleep much sooner than usual that night; the fresh air had
made them sleepy, and Poppy and her mother had a quiet evening.

'Tell me why you were crying, mother dear, when we came home from
church.'

'Oh, Poppy!' said her mother, 'I don't know how to tell you, my poor
little lassie.'

'What is it, mother? Do tell me.'

'You know you said God had sent a present for you, Poppy, when the
babies came?'

'Yes--for me and you, mother,' said the child.

'Poppy,' said her mother, 'I think He's going to give you the biggest
share of it. I think I'm going to die, Poppy, and leave you all. Oh!
Poppy, Poppy, Poppy!' and she sobbed as if her heart would break.

Poppy felt as if she were dreaming, and could not understand what her
mother was saying. Mrs. Byres, in the house opposite, had died a little
time before, but then she had been ill in bed for many a month; and Mrs.
Jack's little boy and girl had died, but then they had had a fever. Her
mother could walk about, and could go out to work, and could look after
the babies. How _could_ she be going to die?

'I didn't like to tell you, Poppy,' her mother went on; 'but it is true,
my darling, and it's better you should know before it comes.'

'But, mother, you are not ill, are you?' said the child; and as she said
this she looked at her mother. Yes, she certainly did look very thin,
and pale, and tired, as she sat by the fire.

'I'm failing fast, Poppy,' said her mother; 'wasting away. I've felt it
coming on me a long time, dear--before your father went away. And last
week I got a ticket for the dispensary, and the doctor said he couldn't
do nothing for me; it was too late, he said. If it wasn't for you and
the babies, Poppy, I would be glad to go, for I'm very, very tired.'

'Mother,' said Poppy, with a great sob, 'however will we get along
without you?'

'I don't know,' said the poor woman. 'I don't know, Poppy; but the good
Lord knows; and He _is_ a good Lord, child. He's never failed me yet,
and I know He'll help you--I know He will. Come to me, my darling.'

And the mother took her little girl in her arms, and held her to her
bosom, and they had a good cry together.

But before very long the twins awoke, and Poppy and her mother began
their work again.




CHAPTER III.

A HOLIDAY.


The next morning when Poppy woke she felt as if she had had a bad dream.
Her mother's words the night before came back to her mind. 'I think I am
going to die and leave you all.' It could not be true, surely! She
raised herself in bed and looked round. Her mother was up already; she
could hear her moving about downstairs, and she had lighted the fire,
for Poppy could hear the sticks crackling in the grate. The twins were
still asleep, lying in bed beside her, and the child peeped at their
little peaceful faces, and stooped to kiss Elijah's tiny hand, which was
lying on the coverlet of the bed. They knew nothing about it, poor
little things. It could not be true, Poppy said to herself; her mother
could not be going to die; she must have dreamt it all.

She crept out of bed very quietly, so as not to wake the babies, dressed
herself, and went downstairs to help her mother to get breakfast ready.
But she found everything done when she got into the kitchen, the cloth
was on the table, and a cup for Poppy, and another for her mother, and
two slices of bread, and two cups of tea.

'Oh, mother,' said Poppy, 'I didn't know I was so late.'

'You're going to have a holiday to-day, Poppy,' said her mother; 'do you
know it's your birthday?'

'My birthday, mother?' repeated the child.

'Yes, you're nine years old to-day, my poor little lass,' said her
mother; 'I reckoned that up as I was walking about with the babies last
night, and I mean you to have a rest to-day; you've been a-toiling and
a-moil-ing with them babies ever since they was born; it's time you had
a bit of quiet and peace.'

'But you're poorly, mother,' said the child.

'No worse nor usual,' said her mother, 'and I've got no work to-day.
Mrs. Peterson isn't going to wash till to-morrow, so you're to have a
real quiet day, Poppy.'

But Poppy, like a good child, could not sit idle when she saw her mother
working, and so in the afternoon, as soon as dinner was over, her mother
sent her out for a walk, and told her not to come home till tea-time.

'There's Jack and Sally, they've got holidays, Poppy; get them to go
with you,' she said.

Jack and Sally lived in a house on the opposite side of the court; they
went to the same school to which Poppy had gone before the babies came,
and they had always played together since they were tiny children.

So Poppy put on her scarlet cloak, and the three children started in
fine spirits. It was such a bright, sunny day, and everything looked
cheerful and happy. There had been a hard frost the night before, and
the road was firm and dry under their feet, and the three children ran
along merrily. They went a long way outside the walls till they came to
a river, by the side of which was a small footpath following the river
in all its windings, and leading across grassy fields, which in summer
time were filled with wild flowers, and which were now covered with pure
white snow.

Oh, how much Poppy enjoyed that walk! She had been so long shut up in
that tiny house, she had so long been imprisoned like a wild bird in a
small cage, that now, when she found herself free to run where she liked
in the clear, frosty air, she felt full of life and spirits.

She had forgotten for a time the sorrow of the night before. All was so
bright and beautiful around her, there was nothing to remind her of
sickness or of death. She was very happy, and skipped along like a
little wild goat.

They walked more slowly when they got into the city again, for they were
tired with their long walk, and as they passed the great cathedral Jack
proposed that they should go inside and rest for a little time on the
chairs in the nave.

'There's lots of time yet, Poppy,' he said; 'it isn't tea-time, I'm
sure.'

It was getting dark for all that, and the lamps were lighted in the
cathedral. Jack took off his hat as he pushed open the heavy oaken door,
and the little girls followed him. Service was going on in the choir,
and they could hear the solemn tones of the organ pealing through the
building, and with them came the sweet sound of many voices singing.

'Isn't it beautiful?' said Poppy; 'let us sit down and listen.'

They were very quiet until the service was over, and when the last Amen
was sung, and the doors of the choir were thrown open for the people to
leave, they got up to go home.

But as they were walking across the cathedral to the door which stood
nearest the direction of their home, Jack suddenly stopped.

'Hullo, Poppy,' he whispered, 'look here,' and he pointed to a little
door in the wall which stood ajar.

'What is it, Jack?' said both little girls at once; 'where does it go
to? Is it a tomb?'

'Oh, no,' said Jack; 'it's the way folks go up to the top of the tower;
you know we often see them walking about on the top; my father went up
last Easter Monday. I always thought they kept it locked; let's go a bit
of the way up, and see what it's like.'

'Oh, no, Jack,' said Sally; 'it looks so dark in there.'

'Don't be a silly baby, Sally,' he said. 'Poppy isn't afraid; are you,
Poppy?'

'No,' said Poppy, in a trembling voice; 'no, I'm not frightened, Jack.'

'Come in then, quick,' said the boy; 'I'll go first, and you can follow
me.'

'But isn't it tea-time?' said Poppy.

Jack did not stop to answer her; he led the way up the steep, winding
stone steps, and the two little girls followed.

'Jack, Jack, stop a minute!' said Poppy, when they had wound round and
round three or four times; 'I don't think we ought to go.'

'I believe you're frightened now, Poppy,' he said; 'I thought you'd more
pluck than that! We won't go far. I just want to get to that place on
the roof where we see the people stand when they're going up; it's only
about half way to the top; come on, we shall soon be there!'

It took a longer time than Jack expected, however, for the steps were
very steep, winding round and round like a corkscrew, and the children
were tired, and could not climb quickly. They stood for a few moments on
the roof outside and looked down into the city, but they could not see
much, for it was getting very dark, and even Jack was willing to own
that it was time to go home.

It did not take them quite so long to go down the steps as it had taken
them to go up, but they were slippery and much worn in places, and the
little girls felt very much afraid of falling, and were very glad when
Jack, who was going first, said they were near the bottom.

But Poppy and Sally a moment afterwards were very much startled, for
Jack gave a sudden cry of horror as he reached the bottom step.

The little door through which they had come was closed. Jack shook it,
and hammered it with his fists, but he could not open it; it was locked,
and they were prisoners in the tower. The verger who had the charge of
the door had remembered that he had left it unfastened, and had turned
the key in the lock soon after the children had entered the tower. No
one had been near when they had crept inside, and so the verger had no
idea that any one had gone up the steps.

'Oh! Jack, Jack, Jack, what shall we do?' said Poppy.




CHAPTER IV.

A LONG NIGHT.


Yes, they were locked in, there was no doubt about it!

'But don't cry, Poppy,' said Jack, as she burst into tears, 'we'll soon
make them hear; the verger sits on that bench close by.'

Jack hammered with his fists on the door, and the sound echoed through
the hollow building. Then the three children waited, and listened,
hoping to hear the verger's footsteps approaching the door. And when
some moments had passed and no one came, he knocked again, and once more
they waited and listened. But it was all in vain; no one heard the
rapping on the door, no one came to let the little prisoners out.

'He must have gone into the crypt,' said Sally; 'he goes down there when
folks come to see the cathedral; maybe he'll be back soon.'

But Jack did not answer her; he was on his knees on the ground, peeping
under the crack of the door.

'What can you see, Jack?' asked Poppy.

'It's all dark,' said Jack; 'the cathedral lights are out, and
everybody's gone home; whatever shall we do?'

The two little girls sat down on the bottom step, and cried and sobbed
as if their hearts would break.

'What's the use of crying?' said Jack, rather angrily; 'what we've got
to do is to try to get out. Let's climb up again, and get out on the
roof; maybe we can make some one hear if we shout loud enough.'

'It's so dark up there now,' said Sally, glancing fearfully at the
narrow, winding staircase; 'we can't see our way a bit.'

'Never mind that, we can _feel_,' said the boy; 'come along.'

'Oh! I shall fall--I shall fall!' sobbed Sally.

'You stop down here, then,' said her brother. 'Poppy and I will go.'

'Oh no,--no,--no!' cried the frightened child; 'don't leave me; I don't
want to stop here by myself.'

Very slowly and carefully the three children felt their way up the steep
steps, and many a tear fell on the old stones as the girls followed
Jack. It seemed a long, long way to them, far farther than it had done
before; and the wind, which had been rising all the afternoon, came
howling and whistling through the narrow window-slits in the tower, and
made them cold and shivering.

At last they reached the open place on the roof, but they found it was
impossible to stand upon it; such a hurricane of wind had arisen, that
they would have been blown over had they tried to leave the shelter of
the tower. So all they could do was to remain where they were, and to
shout as loudly as they could for help; but the cathedral close was very
large, and no one passed through it on that cold, stormy evening, and
the street was far away--so far that the voices of the children could
not be heard by the passers-by, but were drowned by the noisy,
blustering wind. They shouted until they were hoarse, but no help came,
and at last even Jack was obliged to acknowledge that he was afraid
there was no help for it, but that they must make up their minds to stay
there for the night.

'Oh, dear, whatever will mother do without me!' said Poppy; 'she'll have
nobody to help her; I _must_ get back to my babies. Oh, Jack, Jack, I
_must_ get back to my babies.'

'But you _can't_ get back, Poppy,' said Jack mournfully; 'there's nothing
for it but waiting till morning.'

'I'm so cold,' sobbed Sally, 'and I want my tea; whatever shall we do
without our tea?'

'It can't be helped,' said Jack, 'and it's no good crying; let's go to
the bottom of the tower again, it's not so windy there as it is up
here.'

It was hard work getting down in the dark, and with the whistling wind
rushing in upon them at every turn; the old stone steps were worn away
in many places, for thousands of feet had trodden them since the day
they were put in their places, and the children sometimes lost their
footing, and would have fallen had they not held so tightly to each
other.

When they reached the bottom of the stone staircase they crouched
together close to the door, in the most sheltered corner they could
find, and tried to keep each other warm. But it was a bitterly cold
night, and the rough noisy wind came tearing and howling down the
staircase, and found them out in their hiding-place, and made them
shiver from head to foot. And as the hours went by, they felt more and
more hungry; their long walk had given them a good appetite, and they
had had a very early dinner.

Poor little Sally cried incessantly, and the others did all they could
to cheer her; but she refused to be comforted, and at last she was so
tired and exhausted that she sobbed herself to sleep. Jack soon
afterwards followed her example and fell asleep beside her, and only
poor Poppy was awake, crying quietly to herself, and thinking of her
mother and of Enoch and Elijah. She was too anxious and too much
troubled to sleep, and the hours seemed very long to her. It was such a
lonely place in which to spend the night: there was no sound to be heard
but the howling of the wind and the striking of the great cathedral
clock, which made Poppy jump every time it struck the hour.

How long it seemed to Poppy from one hour to another; the time went much
more slowly than usual that night, she thought. Once she became so very
lonely and frightened that she felt as if she must wake the others; but
she was an unselfish little girl, and she remembered how much poor Sally
had cried, and felt glad that she and Jack could forget their trouble
for a little time. So she crept quietly away without disturbing them,
and climbed slowly up the steep steps to the place where she remembered
the first window-slit in the tower came. She thought she would feel less
lonely if she could see the lamps burning in the streets, and would feel
that the world was not quite so far away as it had seemed to her during
all those long, quiet hours.

Poppy did not like to go so far from the other children, and once or
twice she turned back, but at length she climbed as far as the slit, and
looked out. There were the lamps on either side of the long street which
led to the cathedral, but they seemed a great way off, and the cathedral
close was quite dark and empty.

'There isn't anybody near,' said Poppy to herself, as she looked down.
And then she looked up,--up into the sky. It was covered with clouds
which the wind was driving wildly along, but, as Poppy looked, there
came a break in the clouds, and one little patch of sky was left clear
and uncovered. And there, shining down upon Poppy, was a star,--such a
bright beautiful star.

It made her think of heaven, and of God who made the stars. 'God is
near,' said Poppy to herself. 'Mother says He is always close beside us.
Oh, dear, I quite forgot--I've never said my prayers to-night.'

The child knelt down at once on the cold stone steps, and prayed, and
her little prayer went up higher than the towers of that great
cathedral--to the ears of the Lord, who loves little children to speak
to Him.

'O God,' prayed Poppy, 'please take care of me, and Jack, and Sally, and
please don't let mother be frightened, and please make the babies go to
sleep; for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.'

Poppy felt comforted after she had prayed; she crept down the steps
again, and wrapping her little red cloak as tightly round her as she
could, she lay down beside Sally, and fell asleep.




CHAPTER V.

FOUND AT LAST.


That was a terrible night, and one which would never be forgotten in
Grey Friars Court. Hardly any of the people of the court went to bed,
for they were all helping in the search for the lost children. The
bellman was sent up and down the city till late at night, that he might
try to hear tidings of them; the policemen were making inquiries in all
directions; the neighbours were scouring the city from one end to the
other.

Jack and Sally's father and mother were walking about the whole night,
looking for their children in all places, likely and unlikely. And
Poppy's poor mother, who could not leave the babies, paced up and down
her room, and looked anxiously from her window, and trembled each time
that footsteps came down the court.

She could do nothing herself to help her little girl, but she had a
strong Friend who could help her. Again and again, through that long
anxious night, Poppy's mother asked the Lord to watch over her child,
and to bring her safe home again.

Only one trace of the children had been found when morning dawned; Sally
had dropped her little handkerchief on the path leading to the river;
this handkerchief had been found by a policeman, and it had been shown
to Sally's mother, and she had said, with tears in her eyes, that it
belonged to her little girl.

Could the children be drowned in the river? This was the terrible fear
which the neighbours whispered to each other, as they met together after
the night's search. But no one mentioned it to Poppy's mother.

'I wouldn't tell her about that there handkercher, poor thing,' said one
to another 'maybe they're not in the river after all.'

In the morning, as soon as it was light, search was to be made in the
water for the bodies, and every one in Grey Friars Court waited
anxiously for the result.

Very early in the morning the cathedral door was unlocked, and one of
the vergers, an old man of the name of Standish, entered with his wife,
old Betty Standish, and with his daughter Rose Ann, to make the
cathedral fires, and put all in readiness for the services of the day.
As the two women raked out the cinders and ashes from the stoves, the
sound echoed through the hollow building, and woke the sleeping children
in the tower.

Jack sprang to his feet at once, as he saw the dim grey light stealing
down the staircase, and as he heard the voices in the cathedral.

'It's morning at last,' he said; 'now we shall get out;' and he hammered
with all his might on the door.

But the women were making so much noise themselves that the sound did
not attract their attention; they went on with their fire-lighting and
took no notice. Then the children began to call out--

'Let us out--let us out, please; we're locked in!'

The two women paused in their work and listened.

Again the shout came, 'Let us out--let us out; we can't get out; open
the door, please.'

'Whatever on earth is it?' said Rose Ann, coming up to her mother with
an awestruck face.

'Ay, my dear, _I_ don't know,' said her mother, who was trembling from
head to foot. 'I never heard the like; I never did. Call your father,
Rose Ann.'

The verger was in the choir, putting the books in order, and making all
ready for the service. He came at once when his daughter called him.

'Listen, Joshua, listen,' said old Betty.

And once more the children called. 'Let us out, please; we're locked
in; let us out.'

'Do ye think it's a ghost, Joshua?' said his wife, looking fearfully at
the old tombs by which she was surrounded on all sides.

'Ghost! Rubbish!' said her husband; but he was as white as a sheet, and
almost as frightened as she was.

'Let's go and tell the Dean,' said Rose Ann.

'Nonsense,' said the verger, who had recovered himself a little; 'let's
listen where the sound comes from.'

'Let us out; unlock the door, please!' shouted the children again.

'It's some one in the tower,' said the old man; 'though how on earth any
one could have got there it passes me to think.'

So the old people and their daughter went in the direction of the cries,
and the verger took the great old key from his pocket which unlocked the
tower door. Yet even when the key was in the key-hole he paused a
moment, as if he did not like to turn it in the lock.

'I wonder whoever it can be,' he said timidly.

'It's a ghost; I'll be bound it's a ghost,' said old Betty; 'they say
they _do_ haunt all these queer old places.'

'Well, we'll have a look,' said her husband, summoning up all his
courage; 'so here goes.' He turned the key, the door flew open, and out
came the three poor children, weary, pale, and shivering with cold.

'Well, I never!' said the verger's wife, holding up her hands in
amazement.

'Wherever on earth have you come from?' said her husband.

'I know, father,' said Rose Ann; 'these must be the three children of
Grey Friars Court. I heard the bellman crying them last night.'

'Poor little cold things!' said old Betty, 'and have ye been locked in
the tower all night?'

'Yes, ma'am,' said Poppy, 'all night.'

'But however did you get there?' said the verger. 'That's what I want to
know.'

'Please, sir, don't be angry,' said Jack; 'we found the door open, and
we went in.'

'Well, I never heard the like,' said Rose Ann. 'I declare they're
shaking from head to foot. Such a night as it has been, too; it'll be a
wonder if it isn't the death of them.'

'Come along, my poor bairns,' said the old woman. 'I've got some hot
coffee on the hob at home; you shall have a drink at once.'

'Oh no, thank you,' said Poppy; 'I must go home to mother.'

'So you shall, my dear; so you shall,' said old Betty; 'but you'll go
all the quicker for getting a bit of warmth into you; why, you're stiff
with cold, I declare. Poor lambs, you _must_ have had a night of it!
Bring them across, Rose Ann.' And the kind old woman trotted on in front
to stir her fire into a blaze, and to pour out the hot coffee for the
poor children.

She made them sit with their feet on the fender whilst they were
drinking it, and she gave them each a piece of a hot cake, which she
brought out of the oven. And all the time they were eating it she and
Rose Ann were crying over them by turns, and the old verger was shaking
his head and saying: 'I never heard the like; it's a strange business
altogether, it is.'

As soon as they were warmed and fed, the verger, and his wife, and Rose
Ann took the children home; and I wish you could have seen their arrival
in Grey Friars Court. There was such a kissing, and hugging, and crying;
such an excitement and stir; such a rejoicing over the children, who had
been lost but were found again, and such a thanksgiving in the heart of
Poppy's mother, as she saw the answer to her prayer.

No one could make too much of the three children that day. They were
invited out to tea to every house in the court, and sweets, and cakes,
and pennies were showered upon them, till the two mothers declared they
would be quite spoilt, and till Jack announced he would not much mind
spending another night in the tower, if they got all these good things
when they came home. But Poppy and Sally shook their heads at this, and
would not agree with him.




CHAPTER VI.

POPPY WRITES A LETTER.


'Poppy, I want you to write a letter for me, darling,' said her mother
one day.

'Is it to my father?' asked the child.

'No, Poppy; it isn't to your father.'

'Why do you never write to my father, mother?' asked Poppy.

Her mother did not answer her at once, and Poppy did not like to ask her
again. But after a few minutes her mother got up suddenly and shut the
door.

'Poppy, I'll tell you,' she said, 'for I am going to leave you, and you
ought to know.' And then, instead of telling her, the poor woman burst
into tears.

'Don't cry, mother, don't cry,' said the child; 'don't tell me if you'd
rather not.'

'But I _must_ tell you, Poppy,' she said, as she dried her eyes and
looked into the fire. 'Poppy, I loved your father more than I can tell
you, and he loved me, child; yes, he _did_ love me; never you believe
any one who tells you he didn't love me. He loved _me_, and he loved
_you_, Poppy; he was very good to you, wasn't he, my child?'

'Yes, mother, very good,' said Poppy, as she remembered how kind he
always was to her when he came in from work.

'But he got into bad company, Poppy, and he took to drinking. I wouldn't
tell you, dear, only I'm going away, and so I think you ought to know.
Well, bit by bit he was led away. Sometimes, dear, I blame myself, and
think perhaps I might have done more to keep him at home; but he was
always so pleasant with all his mates, and they made so much of him, and
they led him on--yes, Poppy, they led him on--they did, indeed. And I
saw him getting further and further wrong, and I could not stop him, and
there were things which I didn't know about, dear--horse-racing, and
card-playing, and all that sort of thing. And one day, Poppy,' said her
mother, lowering her voice ('I wouldn't tell you, my dear, if I wasn't
going away), one day he went out to his work as usual. I made him a cup
of hot coffee to drink before he started; I always made him that, dear,
if he was off ever so early.

'Well, he was ready to go, but he turned round at the door, and says he,
"Is Poppy awake?" "No, the bairn was fast asleep when I came down," says
I. He put down his breakfast-tin by the door, and he crept upstairs, and
I could hear his steps in the room overhead, and then, Poppy, I listened
at the foot of the stairs, and I heard him give you a kiss. I didn't say
anything, child, when he came down, for I thought maybe he wouldn't like
me to notice it, and he hurried out, as if he was afraid I should ask
him what he was doing.

'Well, dear, dinner-time came, and I always had it ready and waiting for
him, for I think it's a sin and a shame, Poppy, when them that works for
the meat never has time given them to eat it. But the dinner waited
long enough that day, child, for he never came home. I began to think
something must be wrong, for he always came home of a dinner-hour. I
thought maybe he had had some drink; but, Poppy, it was worse than that,
for oh! my darling, he never came home no more.'

'What was wrong with him, mother?'

'He was in debt, child, and had lost money in them horrid races; and
there were more things than that, but I can't tell you all, my dear, nor
I don't want to tell. Only this I want to say: if he ever comes back,
Poppy, tell him I loved him to the last, and I prayed for him to the
last, and I shall look to meet him in heaven; mind you tell him that,
Poppy, my dear.'

'Yes, mother,' said the child, with tears in her eyes; 'I won't forget.'

'And now about the letter; I wish I _could_ write to your father, Poppy,
but I've never had a word from him all this cruel long time--not a
single word, child; and where he is at this moment I know no more than
that table does.'

'Then who is the letter to be written to, mother?' asked the child.

'It's to your granny, Poppy, I want to write; _his_ mother, your
father's mother. I never saw her, child, but she's a good old woman, I
believe; he always talked a deal about his mother, and many a time I've
thought I ought to write and tell her, but somehow I hadn't the heart to
do it, Poppy. But now she must be told.'

'When shall I write it, mother?'

'Here's a penny, child; go and get a sheet and an envelope from the shop
at the end of the street, and if the babies will only keep asleep, we'll
write it at once.'

The paper was bought, and Poppy seated herself on a high stool, and
wrote as her mother told her:--

     'MY DEAR GRANDMOTHER,

     'This comes, hoping to find you quite well, as it leaves my mother
      very ill, and the doctor says she'll never be no better, and my
      Father went away last year, and nobody knows what has become of
      him, and he never writes nor sends no money nor nothing, and Mother
      has got two little babies, and they are both boys, and she wants me
      to ask you to pray God to take care of us, and will you please
      write us a letter?

     'Your affectionate grand-daughter,

     'POPPY.'

It was well that the letter was finished then, for that very night
Poppy's mother was taken very much worse, and the next morning she was
not able to rise from her bed.

And now began a very hard time for the little girl. Two babies to look
after, and a sick mother to nurse, was almost more than it was possible
for one small pair of arms to manage. The neighbours were very kind, and
came backwards and forwards, bringing Poppy's mother tempting things to
eat, and carrying off dirty clothes to wash at home, or any little piece
of work which Poppy could not manage. And often, very often, one or
another of them would come and sit by the sick woman, or would carry off
the crying babies to their own homes, that she might have a little rest
and quiet.

[Illustration]

But, in spite of all this kind help, it was a very hard time for Poppy.
The neighbours had their own homes and their own families to attend to,
and could only give their spare time to the care of their sick
neighbour. And at night Poppy had a weary time of it. Her mother was
weak and restless, and full of fever and of pain, and she tossed about
on her pillow hour after hour, watching her good little daughter with
tears in her eyes, as she walked up and down with the babies, trying to
soothe them to sleep.

Sometimes she would try to sit up in bed, and hold little Enoch or
Elijah for a few moments: but she had become so terribly weak that the
effort was too much for her, and after a few minutes she would fall back
fainting on her pillow, and Poppy had to take the baby away and bathe
her mother's forehead with water before she could speak to her again.

So it was a weary and anxious time for the child. The neighbours said
she was growing an old grandmother, so careworn and anxious had she
become, and Poppy herself could hardly believe that she was the same
little girl who had gazed in the toy-shop window only a few months ago
and had longed for one of those beautiful wax-dolls. She felt too old
and tired ever to care to play again.




CHAPTER VII.

A VISIT FROM GRANDMOTHER.


The summer began very early that year, and it was the hottest summer
that Poppy had ever known. Even at the end of May and the beginning of
June the heat was so great that it made people ill and tired and cross.
Poppy's mother, who was never able to leave her bed, felt it very much.
The court was close and stifling, and the old window in the small
bedroom would only open a little way at the bottom, so that very little
air could get into the room, and the poor woman lay hour after hour
panting for breath, and almost fainting with the heat.

It was no easy time for Poppy. The neighbours were still very kind, but
the heat made them unable to do as much as before, and somehow
everybody's temper went wrong with the hot weather, and there was a good
deal of quarrelling in the court. Mrs. Brown quarrelled with Mrs. Jones
about something, and Ann Turner would not speak to Mrs. Smith because
she had offended her about something else, and once or twice there were
angry voices in the court, which troubled the poor sick woman. And when
the neighbours came in to see her they would pour out the history of
their grievances, and this worried and distressed her a good deal.

The babies, too, felt the hot weather very much. They were seven months
old now, but they were poor sickly little creatures, quite unable to
roll about the floor like other babies of that age, and needing almost
as much nursing and care as they had done when they were first born.
Poppy did her very best for them and for her mother, but she was only a
child after all, and she could not keep them as clean as they ought to
have been kept, nor the house as tidy and free from dirt as it used to
be when her mother was able to look after it, and sometimes poor Poppy,
brave though she was, felt almost inclined to give up in despair.

There was one day when she was very much cast down and troubled. It was,
if possible, a hotter day than the ten very hot days which had gone
before it. And it was everybody's washing-day. The court was filled with
clothes, steaming in the hot sun, and shutting out what little air might
possibly have crept down to the rooms below. But there seemed to be no
air anywhere that sultry day.

Poppy's mother was very much worn and exhausted, and Enoch and Elijah
did nothing but cry. Hour after hour they cried, not a loud, angry
scream, such as strong babies might give, but a weak, weary wail, which
went on, and on, and on, till Poppy felt as if she could bear it no
longer.

She left them on the bed for a few minutes beside her mother, and ran
downstairs to make a cup of tea and a piece of toast for mother's
dinner. They lived on bread and tea now, for they had nothing but what
they got from the parish, and if the neighbours had not been very kind,
and brought them in little things from time to time, even the parish
money would not have been enough to keep them from starving.

When Poppy went downstairs she had a little quiet cry. There was so much
to do, and somehow that hot day it seemed impossible to do it. She knew
that the house was untidy, and the babies needed washing, and there were
dirty clothes waiting to be made clean, and cups and plates and basins
standing ready to be washed up. And it seemed too hot and tiring to do
anything.

Poppy went to the window for a minute, and putting her fingers in her
ears that she might not hear the wail of the babies, she stood looking
up at the strip of blue sky, which she could just see between the houses
of the court. How pure and lovely it looked! And God lived somewhere up
there Poppy knew. And God loved her--Poppy knew that, too. Her mother
said He had sent His dear Son to die for her--the only Son He had--He
had sent Him to die on the cross, that she might go to live with Him in
heaven. God must love her very much to do that, Poppy said to herself.
She thought she would ask God to help her that hot day,--if He loved her
she was sure He would feel sorrow for her, now that she was so tired and
had so much to do.

So, looking up at the blue sky, Poppy said aloud, 'O God, please help
me, for I'm very tired, and I don't know how ever to get everything
done, and please make me a good girl; for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.'
Would God hear her prayer? Poppy asked herself, as she came away from
the window; she wondered very much if he would. And, if He did hear her,
how would the help come? It was not likely that He would send one of the
neighbours in to help her, for they were all too busy with their washing
to have much time to spare. There were the angels, _they_ were God's
servants, and Poppy had learnt at school that they came to help God's
people; but she had never heard of an angel washing up cups and saucers,
or cleaning a house, or nursing a baby, and that was the help Poppy
wanted just then. Well, she had prayed to God, and mother said God
always heard prayer; she would wait and see.

Poppy filled the kettle, and was trying to put a few things in order in
the untidy kitchen when there came a knock at the door. Poppy started.
Could some one be coming to help her? The neighbours never knocked--they
opened the door and walked in--and Poppy thought the angels would not
knock, for her teacher told her they could come in when the door was
shut. Who could it be?

She went to the door and opened it, and there she found an old woman
with a large market-basket on her arm, who wanted to know if Mrs.
Fenwick lived there. Yes, that was her mother's name, Poppy said.
Whereupon the old woman came in, put down her basket, and then seized
Poppy and gave her a good hearty kiss on both her cheeks.

'Why, you're John Henry's bairn,' she said, 'and as like him as two pins
is like each other.'

It was grandmother, dear old grandmother, who had come from her home far
away in the country to see her son's wife and children, and to do all
she could to help them. And grandmother had not been long in the house
before Poppy felt sure that God had sent her, and that she was just the
help the poor child so much needed.

Poor old grandmother! she was hot and tired and dusty, and she had been
travelling in the heat for many hours on that hot summer's morning. She
sat down on a chair by the door, fanning herself with her red cotton
pocket handkerchief, and kissing Poppy again and again, as she called
her 'my lad's bonny bairn,' and told her that she was the very picture
of what her father was when he was her age, and how her John Henry was
the best scholar in all Thurswalden School, and she felt sure his bairn
must be a clever little girl too.




CHAPTER VIII.

JACKY AND JEMMY.


'Now, my dear,' said grandmother, when she had rested for a minute or
two, 'where's my lad's wife? Your mother, my lass; where is she?'

'Oh, she's in bed, grandmother!' said Poppy. 'She's very ill, is my
mother.'

'I'll go up and see her,' said the old woman. 'To think that my John
Henry has been a married man these ten years, and I've never seen his
wife!'

But when she _did_ see John Henry's wife, grandmother sat down and
sobbed like a child. She was so white, so thin, so worn, that the kind
old woman's heart was filled with love and with shame--love for her poor
suffering daughter-in-law, shame that her son, the lad of whom she had
been so proud, should have left her when she needed him so much.

How long grandmother would have cried it is impossible to say, had not a
dismal wail come from one side of the bed, followed almost immediately
by another dismal wail from the other side of the bed. It was Enoch and
Elijah, who had fallen asleep for a few minutes whilst Poppy was
downstairs, but who had waked up at the sound of a strange voice.
Grandmother sprang from her seat as soon as she heard them cry. She had
not seen the babies before, for they were covered by the bed-clothes.
She held them one in each arm, and kissed them again and again.

'Oh, my bonny, bonny bairns!' she said; 'my own little darling lambs! To
think that God Almighty has sent you back again! Why, I'm like Job, my
lass; I lost them five-and-forty years ago;--ay, but it seems only
five-and-forty days. Oh! my own beautiful little lads. I kicked sore
against losing them, I did indeed, my lass, poor silly fool that I was!
and now here's God given me them back again. I'm a regular old Job now,
ain't I? Not that I was patient, like him; he was a sight better than
me--a sight better. Oh, you dear things, won't your grandmother love
you!'

'Had you twins of your own, grandmother?' asked her daughter-in-law.

'Ay, my dear, that I had, and little lads, too--the finest children you
ever saw; why, it was the talk of the country-side, my dear, what
beautiful bairns they was.'

'And how old were they when you lost them, grandmother?'

'Why, my dear,' said the old woman, '_my_ child was ten months and one
week old, and _his_ child was ten months and three weeks old--just a
fortnight's difference, my dear.'

'I thought you said they were _both_ yours, grandmother,' said Poppy.

'Ay, my darling, so they was; but that was how we got to talk of them.
You see, me and my master had been married nigh on five years, and
never had no childer (we lived up at the farm at that time), and then
these babies came, and I think our heads were fairly turned by
them--_he_ was well-nigh crazed, he was indeed, my dear. "Sally," he
says, when he came in to look at them, "you pick one and I'll have the
other--half-and-half, that's fair share," he says. "Now, Sally, you
choose first."

'"Well," says I, "I'll have the ginger-haired one; it's most like me." I
used to have ginger hair, my dear; you wouldn't believe it, for it's all
turned white now, but I had, just like Poppy there, beautiful ginger
hair. Some folks don't like the colour, my dear, but your grandfather
used to like it. Why, he said when he was courting me that my hair was
the colour of marigolds, and they was always his favourite flowers; he
had, 'em in his own little garden when he was a tiny lad, he said.

'Well, I picked the one with ginger hair, and called it _my_ child, and
he picked the black-haired one, which was the very picture of him--why,
he had a head like a crow's back, my dear. And so we each had a baby of
our own, and would you believe it, my lass, he took that care of it,
you'd have thought he was an old nurse--you would indeed. He washed it
and he dressed it,--ay, but I did laugh the first time,--and he gave it
the bottle, and he got a little girl from the village to come and mind
it when he was out, and in the evening we sat one on each side of the
fire, he with his child, and I with mine; and then at night, when we
went to bed, his bairn slept in _his_ arms, and my bairn slept in mine.
Well then we had them christened, and his was Jacky and mine was Jemmy,
and he _was_ proud of his child that day--as proud as Punch; he was
indeed, my dear. He carried him all the way--Oh, dear! oh, dear! what
_have_ I done!' said the old woman, as she turned to the bed and saw
Poppy's mother in tears.

'Why, you're crying, my dear; I oughtn't to have told you. What a silly
old goose I am! I ought to have remembered that lad of mine, and how
he's gone and left you, instead of giving a hand with his own babies, as
my master did. Dear me, dear me, whatever was I thinking of?'

'Oh, granny,' said her daughter-in-law, 'do tell me about them; I like
to hear--I do indeed; please go on.'

'Well, my dear, if you _will_ have it so, I'll go on. They grew up
beautiful babies, they did indeed, and didn't folks admire them!
There's lots of people drives through our village when it's the
season at Scarborough; they takes carriages, my dear, and they come
driving out with lads in red jackets riding on them poor tired
horses--"post-williams," I think they call them. I'm telling you no
lie, my dear, when I tell you them little lads has brought in scores
of threepenny bits that the ladies have thrown them from their
carriages, when the girl took them out by the lodge gate; they was
so taken with the pretty dears, they was.

'Well, all went on well, my lass, till the teeth began to come,--oh,
them teeth, what a nuisance they are! I've lost mine, my dear, all but
two, and I'm sure it's a good job to have done with 'em--they're nothing
but bother, always aching and breaking and worrying you. Well, the
teething went very hard with the babies; his child was the worst,
though, and one day little Jacky had a convulsion fit, and didn't my
master send off for the doctor in a hurry; and all that night he sat up
watching his bairn, for fear it should have another fit. Doctor came
once or twice after that, for the little lad kept poorly, though the
fits did not come back.

'"Ay, doctor," I says one day, when he had little Jack in his arms, and
was saying what a pretty boy he was--"Ay, doctor," I says, "but look at
_my_ child," and I held up little Jemmy. "_He's_ the beauty now, isn't
he, doctor?"

'"You're very fond of that boy, aren't you?" says doctor.

'"Fond of him! Why, doctor," I says, "I love him till I often think I
could go bare-foot all my life and live on bread and water if it would
do him a bit of good."

'"Take care you don't love him too much," says doctor, looking quite
grave; "folks mustn't make idols even of their own bairns. Don't be
offended, missis," he says, "but it doesn't do to set your heart too
much on anything, not even on your own little lad: you might lose him,
you know."

'Well, I was huffy with doctor after that; I was a bit put out, and I
says, "Well, doctor, if I thought I was going to lose him I would love
him a hundred times better than ever." So, my dear, doctor shook his
head at me and went away, and (would you believe it!) only five hours
after I had to send for him all in a hurry to come to _my_ child. He'd
taken a fit like Jacky had; but oh! my dear, he didn't come out of it as
Jacky did; it was a sore, sore fit, and before doctor could get to
him--and he ran all the way from the village--my bonny bairn was gone.'

'Oh, grandmother, you _would_ feel that,' said Poppy's mother.

'Yes, my dear, I did indeed; and when bedtime came, and he had _his_
child laid aside him, and _my_ child was laid dead in the best room
downstairs, I felt as if my heart would break. He wanted me to take
_his_ child, but little Jacky was used to father, and wouldn't come to
me, and, my dear, I cried myself to sleep.'

'And how much longer did the other baby live, grandmother?' said Poppy.

'Only fifteen days, my dear, and we buried 'em both in one little
grave,--I often go to look at it now;--and when we put _his_ child in,
and I saw my child's little coffin at the bottom of the grave, my dear,
I wished I could go in too.

'I was very hard and rebellious, ay, I was, I see it all now,' said
grandmother, wiping her eyes. 'But just to think of God giving 'em back
to me after five-and-forty years! Why, it's wonderful,' said the old
woman in a cheerful voice. '"Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not
all His benefits." That's the verse for me, my dear, now, isn't it?'

And grandmother took up first Enoch and then Elijah, and kissed them and
hugged them as lovingly as ever she had kissed her own little babies.




CHAPTER IX.

JOHN HENRY'S BAIRN.


I have read the story of a fairy who came down into a dark and dismal
room, where a poor girl clad in rags was cleaning the fireside, and who,
by one touch of her wand, changed everything in the room; the girl found
herself dressed in a beautiful robe, and everything around her was made
lovely and pleasant to look at. It was a new place altogether.

Now, I think that grandmother was something like that good fairy, for it
was perfectly wonderful what a change she made, in the course of a few
hours, in that dismal house. No sooner had she had a cup of tea, than
she took off her bonnet and shawl, and set to work to put things in
order. First, she gave the babies a warm bath, and cried over them, and
loved them to her heart's content; and then, as they had no clean
clothes to put on, she wrapped them in some of her own garments which
she took from her bundle, and, soothed by the unusual comfort and
cleanliness, Enoch and Elijah were soon fast asleep.

Then grandmother trotted downstairs again for more hot water, and washed
Poppy's poor sick mother, and brushed her tangled hair, and then dressed
her in one of her own clean night-gowns, smelling of the sweet field of
clover in which it had been dried, and put on the bed a pair of her own
sheets, which she had brought with her in case they might be useful.

Oh, how grateful Poppy's mother was!

'Granny,' she said, as she gave her a kiss, 'I haven't been so
comfortable never since I was ill; I declare I feel quite sleepy.'

'Well, go to sleep, my lass,' said grandmother; 'that's the very best
thing you can do.' So she laid the babies beside their mother in bed,
and she and Poppy went downstairs.

'Now, my little lass,' said the old woman, 'you and me will soon tidy
things up here.'

It was wonderful to Poppy to see how quickly her grandmother could work.
She was a brisk, active old woman, and in a very short time all the
cups, and saucers, and plates were washed and put by, the fireside was
swept, and the kitchen table was scoured. Then, leaving Poppy to wash
the floor, her grandmother carried off the heap of dirty clothes lying
in the corner into the tiny back kitchen, and, long before Poppy's
mother or the babies woke, there were two lines of little garments hung
out to be quickly dried in the scorching afternoon sun.

'And now, Poppy,' said grandmother, 'fetch my basket, my good little
lass, and we'll unpack it.'

Oh, what a basket that was! Poppy's eyes opened wide with astonishment
when she saw all that it contained. There was a whole pound of fresh
country butter, a loaf of grandmother's own home-made bread, a plum
cake she had made on purpose for Poppy, a jar of honey made by
grandmother's bees, and a box of fresh eggs laid by grandmother's hens,
a bottle of thick yellow cream, and, what Poppy liked best of all, a
bunch of roses, and southernwood and pansies, and lavender from
grandmother's garden.

It was very pleasant to get tea ready, when there were so many good
things to put on the table, and it was still more pleasant when Poppy's
mother woke, to take her a cup of tea with the good country cream in it,
and to watch how she enjoyed some thin slices of grandmother's bread and
butter, and a fresh egg laid that morning by 'little Jenny, the bonniest
hen of the lot.'

'Now, Poppy,' said grandmother, when tea was over, 'you get on your hat,
and go out a bit. You're a good little lass if ever there was one--bless
you, my darling, my own John Henry's bairn! But you want a bit of rest
and play, you do indeed.'

'Yes, that she does,' said her mother. 'Why, it's weeks since she got
out for a walk--not since I was in bed, bless her!'

So Poppy put on her hat and went out. It was a lovely summer's evening;
the great heat of the day was over, and a gentle breeze was blowing,
which was very cooling and refreshing to the tired little girl. She went
slowly past the great cathedral, and she thought how beautiful it
looked, standing out against the quiet evening sky. Then she climbed up
a flight of stone steep, and these took her to the top of the old wall,
which went all round that ancient city.

And now Poppy had a beautiful view, over the tops of the chimneys, and
across the black smoky courts, to where the green fields were lying in
the evening sunshine, and the river was lighted up by the rays of the
setting sun. And there on the top of the old city wall, in a quiet
little corner where no one could see her, Poppy knelt down, and thanked
God for hearing her prayer, and for sending grandmother to help her. On
her way home she met Jack coming to meet her. 'Poppy,' he said, 'I've
got a present for you.'

He put his hand under his thick fustian jacket and pulled out something
tied up tightly in a red cotton pocket-handkerchief.

'Come and sit on this doorstep, Poppy,' he said, 'and look what it is.'

It was a large green apple.

'Why, Jack,' said Poppy, 'where did you get it? It's a funny time of
year to get an apple; I didn't know there was any left.'

'No, it's a real curiosity,' said Jack, 'and I said to myself when I got
it, "Poppy shall have that big 'un; she was such a plucky girl that
night in the tower--she never whimpered nor nothing." So I tied him up
in that handkercher, and there he is.'

'Thank you so much, dear Jack,' said Poppy gratefully. 'But however did
you get it?'

'Why it was old Sellers, the greengrocer, gave him to me,' said
Jack,--'him as has a shop in Newcastle Street; he called me in and he
says, "Do you want a job, my lad?" and when I told him "Yes, I do," he
set me to clean out his apple-room, where he stores his apples in
winter. So he took me in, and it _was_ a sight--such a sight as _you_
never saw, Poppy! Scores of 'em all rotten and smelling. Ay, they _were_
horrid!' said Jack, making a face, 'all but half a dozen that were quite
good. Well, I picked 'em out, Poppy, and took 'em to old Sellers, and he
gave me half of 'em: so I ate one myself, and I gave one to Sally, and I
kept the biggest of 'em all for you.'

'It _was_ good of you, Jack,' said Poppy.

'Well, eat it then,' said the boy--'they're very nice--as good as can
be,' and he smacked his lips at the recollection.

But Poppy had rolled her apple up in her pinafore, and did not seem
inclined to begin to eat it.

'Whatever are you keeping it for?' said Jack, in rather a disappointed
voice.

'Jack,' said Poppy, stopping short, and looking up in his face, 'is it
for my very own?'

'Why, yes, Poppy--of course.'

'To do just whatever I like with it?'

'Why, yes, of course,' said Jack again.

'Then I shall give it to my grandmother,' said Poppy; 'she's come
to-day, and she's ever so good to us; and God sent her, and she's
cleaned the house beautiful. I shall give it to my grandmother, Jack.'

'All right,' he said; 'only I'd like you to have just one bite yourself,
Poppy, to see how good it is.'

He was quite satisfied when Poppy promised to ask her grandmother to
give her the last bite; and the little girl hastened home, feeling very
happy, and picturing out to herself what a great treat that big apple
would be to the old woman.

'Here,' she said, holding it out to her, 'it's all for you,
grandmother--only Jack wants me _just_ to have the last bite.'

'All for me,' repeated the old woman, as she looked up from the work she
had in her hand--a little old torn frock of Poppy's, which she was
mending.

'Yes,' said the child, 'all for you.'

'Well, it's a beauty, I'm sure!' said grandmother, turning it over in
her hand; 'but you see, my dear, many's the long day since I've eat an
apple. Why, my little lass, what can an old body with only two teeth
do?'

'Do try, granny,' said Poppy, holding the apple to her mouth; 'it isn't
so very hard, and Jack says it's _so_ good. Do try!'




CHAPTER X.

THE MOTHER'S LEGACY.


And grandmother _did_ try--for she did not want to disappoint Poppy. But
somehow the two teeth would not go into the apple; they were too far
apart, and there were no teeth below to help them; and so, after many
attempts, the poor old woman was obliged to say she was afraid she could
not manage it.

'If at first you don't succeed, try, try, try again. That's a good rule,
my dear; but it doesn't always answer, Poppy. But I'll tell you what, my
little girl,' said she, as she noticed how disappointed the child was,
'I'll put it in the oven and bake it for my supper, and then I _shall_
have a treat!'

'Oh, granny, I'm _so_ glad!' said Poppy, throwing her arms around her
neck--'I do love you so very much--you are so good to me!'

'Why, you're John Henry's bairn,' said granny, as she held her fast in
her arms--'how could I help loving John Henry's bairn?'

'Polly, my dear,' said grandmother the next day to Poppy's mother,
'Polly, my dear, I'm going to take you home with me.'

But the sick woman shook her head.

'Don't shake your head, my dear,' said grandmother; 'I believe if I
could put you down on the top of the moors, and if you could get the
breezes off the heather, why, my lass, I believe you'd get well in no
time!'

'You must ask the doctor, grandmother,' said Poppy's mother; 'he is
coming to-day.'

So when the doctor had paid his usual visit, grandmother trotted after
him downstairs.

'Now, doctor,' said she, 'I'll tell you what I'm going to do; I'm going
to take her home with me. Country air is the best physic after all, now
isn't it, doctor? You can't say anything against that, I'll be bound!'

But the doctor shook his head.

'Dear me, doctor,' said grandmother, 'don't _you_ go and shake your
head. Surely she'll be well enough to go in a week or ten days. Or maybe
a fortnight or three weeks, doctor,' she added, as she saw that he
looked very grave.

'My good woman,' said the doctor, 'you don't know how ill she is! It is
only a question of time now.'

'You don't mean to say, doctor,' said grandmother, 'that she won't get
better?'

'She may live a week,' said the doctor, as he put on his hat, 'but I do
not think she will live so long.'

Poor old grandmother, it was a great downfall to her hopes; she had
thought, and hoped, and believed, that the country air would soon make
John Henry's wife well again, and now she was told that she had only a
few days to live.

She could not go upstairs with such news as that. So she bustled about
the kitchen, pretending to be busy, washing up the tea-things, and
sweeping the fireside, and stopping every now and then to wipe away the
tears that would come in her eyes. And all this time Poppy's mother was
waiting, and listening, and wondering why grandmother did not come to
tell her what the doctor had said.

At last she could wait no longer, but rapped on the floor with the stick
which grandmother had put by her bedside.

Slowly, very slowly, the old woman went upstairs. But even when she was
in the bedroom, she did not seem inclined to talk, but began to wash
Enoch and Elijah, and never turned her face towards her daughter-in-law,
lest she should see how tearful her eyes were.

'Grandmother,' said Poppy's mother at last, 'tell me what the doctor
said.'

'He won't let me take you away, my lass,' said grandmother, shortly.

'Does he think I shall not live long?' asked the sick woman. 'Tell me
what he said, grandmother, please.'

'He said you might perhaps live a week, my dear,' said grandmother,
bursting into tears, and rocking Enoch and Elijah in her arms.

Poppy's mother did not speak, but she did just what king Hezekiah did
when he got a similar message, she turned her face to the wall.
Grandmother did not dare to look at her for some time, and when she did
she saw that her pillow was wet with tears.

'Poor lass, poor lass!' she said tenderly; 'no wonder ye cannot help
fretting; it's a fearsome thing to die, it is indeed.'

'Oh, it isn't that, grandmother,' said Poppy's mother; 'it isn't that. I
was thinking about the poor children.'

'And what about the children, bless 'em?' said the old woman.

'Why, I'm afraid it will go hardly with them in the House,' said the
poor woman, beginning to cry afresh. 'They do say some of them old
nurses are not over-good to babies, and they think 'em such a lot of
trouble, poor little motherless dears! And there's Poppy, too; she's
been ever such a good little girl to me, and she'll feel so
lonesome-like in that big, rambling place. I don't suppose they'll let
her be with the babies, for all she loves them so.'

'Now, Polly, my dear,' said grandmother, starting from her seat, 'never
you say another word about that. If you think I'm going to let John
Henry's bairns go into the Workhouse, why, my dear, you don't know what
sort of stuff John Henry's mother is made of! Why, my lass, it would be
throwing God Almighty's gifts back in His face. I've wearied for my twin
babies all these years, and fretted and fumed because I'd lost them, and
then as soon as He gives 'em back to me, I go and shove them off into
the House! No, no, my dear,' said grandmother, 'I'm not such an old
stupid as that. And as for Poppy, my lass, why, she'll be my right-hand
woman! They shall come home with me, my dear, and I'll be their
mother--dear, blessed little chaps--and Poppy shall be their nurse, and
we'll all be as happy as ever we _can_ be without you, my dear.'

'Oh, grandmother, it seems too good to be true,' said Poppy's mother;
'but you can never keep three children.'

'Yes, my dear, I can; my good man, he was careful and thrifty, and he
saved a good tidy sum. And my lady's very good to me,--why, I live in
the lodge rent free, and get my coals, and many's the coppers the folks
in their carriages throws out, when I go to open the gate. You see it's
a sort of a public road, my dear, and there's all kinds of folk goes by.
So I've enough and to spare; only I'm lonesome often, and haven't nobody
to speak to for hours together. And now the Lord's going to send me good
company, and I shall be a happier woman than I've been since my good
man died, and my John Henry went away; I shall indeed, my dear.'

Poppy's mother was almost too happy to answer her; a great load was
lifted off her heart, and she lay quite still, with her eyes closed for
some time, trying to tell her best Friend how grateful she was to Him
for all He had done for her. Meanwhile, the poor old woman was rocking
the babies in her arms, and wiping away the tears, which would come in
her eyes as she thought of what the doctor had said.

Then Poppy came in, bright and happy, with a bunch of white roses in her
hands, which Jack's friend the greengrocer had given him, and which he
had sent to Poppy's mother. She was very much distressed to see her
grandmother crying.

'What is it, granny, dear?' she said, putting her arms round her neck,
and kissing her; 'are you poorly?'

'You had best tell her, grandmother,' said Poppy's mother; 'it will
come less sudden-like on her after.'

But grandmother could not speak. She tried once or twice, but something
in her throat seemed to choke her, and at length she laid the sleeping
babies on the bed, buried her face in her apron, and went downstairs.

'What is it, mother?' said Poppy; 'did the doctor say you were worse?'

'Poppy,' said her mother, 'shall I tell you what the doctor said, my
darling?'

'Yes, please, mother,' said the child.

'He said that in a few days more I should be quite well, Poppy; well and
strong, like you, my dear--no more pain--no more weakness--for ever.'

'Then why does granny cry?' said Poppy, with a puzzled face.

'Because, darling, grandmother wanted me to go to _her_ home and get
well there; but instead of that, God is going to take me to _His_ home,
Poppy, to be well for ever and ever. Will you try to be glad for me,
darling?'

'Yes, mother,' said little Poppy with a sob,--'I'll try; but, oh mother,
I wish He'd take me too!'




CHAPTER XI.

THE STORY OF THE RING.


'Polly, my dear,' said grandmother, when she was sitting beside her the
next day, 'aren't ye feared to die!'

'No, grandmother,' said the poor woman, 'I'm not afraid.'

'Well, _I_ should be,' said grandmother, 'if I knew I was going away in
a few days; why, my dear, I should be frightened out of my wits, I
should indeed.

'And so should I have been, two years ago,' said Poppy's mother; 'but
I'm not afraid now. I'll tell you how it was, granny, that I got not to
be frightened to die. I used to go to a Mothers' Meeting of a Monday
afternoon, before John Henry went away, and before I had to go out
washing, and while we did our sewing a lady used to read to us.'

'Who was it, my dear?'

'Miss Lloyd; she's the clergyman's sister, granny. Well, one day (I
remember it so well) she brought a beautiful ring to show us. Oh! it
_was_ a beauty, grandmother. There was a ring of lovely large diamonds
all round it. She told us that some old lady had given it to her for a
keepsake, just before she died, and that she would not lose it for a
great deal. "Now," she said, "you are all my friends, and I want a bit
of advice. I'm going to start to-morrow on a long journey; I am going to
travel in foreign parts, and stop at all sorts of inns and
lodging-places. Now do you think it would be safe for me to take my ring
with me?"

'"Well, ma'am," said old Betty, who's always ready with her tongue, "I
wouldn't advise you to do so. They're queer folk, them foreigners, and
maybe you'd be washing your hands at some of them outlandish places, and
take off your ring, and then go away and leave it behind, and never see
it no more."

'"That's just what I've been thinking," said Miss Lloyd; "thank you for
your advice, Betty. I'm sure my ring will not be safe, and I can't keep
it safe myself; well then, what shall I do?"

'"Couldn't you trust it to somebody, to take care of for you, ma'am?"
said another woman.

'"Thank you, that's a very good idea. I think it's the best thing I can
do. Now let me think," said Miss Lloyd; "I must get some one who is
_able_ to take care of it, and who is _willing_ too. Oh! I know," she
said; "there's my brother--he is _able_. He has a strong box at the
bank, where he keeps his papers; he can put it in there, and I feel sure
he will be willing to do it for me. I hear his voice in the next room;
I'll call him in, and ask him."'

'And did she ask him?' said grandmother.

'Yes, she brought him in, and she said: "Now, Arthur," she said, "these
friends of mine advise me to trust my ring to you. I can't keep it safe
myself, but I feel I can trust you. I know you are able to keep it for
me whilst I am away; I commit it to your care." So up she got from her
seat, and handed the ring in its little case to Mr. Lloyd, and he put it
in his waistcoat pocket, saying, as he left the room, "All right, Emily,
don't you trouble about it; I'll take care of it."'

'Well, my dear,' said grandmother, 'all that was very nice, I've no
doubt; but how it makes you any happier to die, it beats me to see.'

'Oh, but you haven't heard the end of it, grandmother,' said Poppy's
mother.

'No, nor I won't hear it till you've had a cup of tea, my dear. You're
as white as a sheet. I oughtn't to have let you talk so long.'

But when she had had the tea, and an hour's quiet sleep, and when the
babies were asleep, and grandmother and Poppy were sitting beside her
in the twilight, the poor woman went on with her story.

'When Mr. Lloyd had gone, grandmother, his sister said, "I can't thank
you all enough for your good advice. I feel quite happy about my ring.
And now you won't mind my asking you what are _you_ going to do with
_your_ treasure?"

'"Well, ma'am," said old Betty, "the only ring that I have is my wedding
ring, and that's not worth sixpence to anybody but myself, so I don't
suppose it stands much chance of being stolen."

'"Betty," said Miss Lloyd, turning to her, "you have a treasure worth
_far, far_ more than my ring. I mean your precious soul, which will live
for ever and ever and ever somewhere; your undying self, Betty. Only
your body will go in the grave; you yourself will be living for ever.
Dear friends," she said, speaking to all of us, "I want each of you to
ask this question: What about my soul? Is it safe?"

'Then she told us, grandmother, that we were travelling through an
enemy's country; Satan and his evil spirits wanted to get our treasure.
She told us we could not keep our soul safe ourselves; if we tried we
should certainly lose it, as she would have lost her ring. "And oh, dear
friends," she said, "what shall it profit you, if you gain the whole
world, and lose your own soul?"'

'Well, she was right there, my dear,' said grandmother.

'"Now, then," she says, "I want you to do as you advised me to do. I
want you to get some one to keep your treasure for you--some one who is
able, some one who is willing; who shall it be?"

'"I suppose you mean the Lord, ma'am," said old Betty.

'"Yes," she said, "I mean the Lord Jesus. He is able, for He has all
power; He is willing, for He died on purpose that He might do so. Won't
you trust your treasure to Him?" she said. "Won't you go straight to
Him, and say, Lord Jesus, here is my soul; I can't keep it myself; Satan
wants to get it for his own. I trust it to Thee; I commit it to Thee to
be saved."

'Well, grandmother,' said Poppy's mother, 'I didn't forget what she
said, and that night, when John Henry had gone upstairs to bed, I knelt
down in the kitchen, and trusted my soul to the Lord Jesus to be saved,
because He had died for me; I put my soul in His hands, grandmother, and
I know He will keep it safe.'

'Well, my dear,' said grandmother, 'it's to be hoped He will.'

'I _know_ He will, grandmother; I don't doubt Him,' said Poppy's
mother. 'Miss Lloyd taught us a verse about that: "I know whom I have
believed, and am persuaded that He is able to keep that which I have
committed unto Him against that day." And she said if we were to begin
doubting that our soul was safe when we had taken it to Jesus to be
saved, it would be the same as saying we did not trust Him. "What would
you think," she said, "if I were to be saying all the time I was away
Oh, dear me, I'm afraid I shall never see my ring again; I'm afraid it
isn't safe after all?"

'"Why, ma'am," said old Betty, "you'll excuse me saying so, but I should
think you was very rude to Mr. Lloyd, and if I was there I should give
you a bit of my mind; you mustn't be offended at me saying so," says
Betty, "but I should indeed."

'"And what would you say, Betty?" says Miss Lloyd.

'"I should tell you, ma'am," says Betty "that if you had trusted your
ring to Mr. Lloyd, it was as safe as safe could be, and it was an insult
to him to doubt it."

'"Betty," says Miss Lloyd, "you're quite right; and that's just what I
feel about the Lord Jesus. I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded
that He is able to keep that soul which I have committed unto Him."'

'Well,' said grandmother, 'it seems all right when you put it like that,
and I wish I was as happy as you are, my dear;--but I'm a
good-for-nothing old woman, I am indeed, and somehow I'm afraid He
wouldn't do it for me.'

'Poppy,' said her mother, 'do you think you could find me a Mission
Hymn-book?'

'Yes, mother,' said Poppy; 'here's one on the table.' The poor woman
turned over the leaves with trembling fingers, for she was very weak and
tired.

'Poppy, dear,' she said, when she had found the place, 'read this hymn
to grandmother.'

And Poppy read:

     'Jesus, I will trust Thee, trust Thee with my soul!
      Guilty, lost, and helpless, Thou canst make me whole.
      There is none in heaven or on earth like Thee;
      Thou hast died for sinners--therefore, Lord, for me.
      Jesus, I do trust Thee, trust without a doubt,
      Whosoever cometh Thou wilt not cast out:
      Faithful is Thy promise, precious is Thy blood--
      These my soul's salvation, Thou my Saviour God!'

'Oh, grandmother, and oh, Poppy,' she said, when the child had finished
reading, 'trust your soul to Jesus _to-night_.'

[Illustration]

'Well, my dear, I will,' said poor old grandmother, wiping her eyes.

'And you, my own little Poppy?'

'Yes, dear mother,' said the child; 'I won't forget.'




CHAPTER XII.

THE WONDERFUL FIRE.


'Polly, my dear,' said grandmother the next day, as she was washing the
babies, 'I didn't forget what you asked me to do last night; but I'm
afraid, my dear, I'm very much afraid.'

'What are you afraid of, granny?' asked Poppy's mother.

'Why, I'm afraid of getting cold and hard again, my dear,' she said;
'it's all very well for Poppy, but I've been putting off so long, I'm
afraid of slipping into all the bad, old ways again. Why, my dear, I've
tried to pray and to read my Bible scores of times before, but my mind
has soon gone a-wandering away to my chickens, or to my butter or to
the bit of washing I do for the Hall, and all such like things. Now, my
dear, how do I know it won't be like that again?'

'Ye can't get cold and hard, granny, if the fire burns bright; and the
Lord will keep it alight. He will indeed.'

'What do you mean by the fire, my dear?'

'Why, granny, I saw it at the Mothers' Meeting, Miss Lloyd showed us it,
such a pretty picture! I've often thought of it since.'

'Tell me about it, my lass, if it won't bring the cough on.'

'No, I feel so much easier to-day, granny, it doesn't hurt me to talk
like it did last week. I'll stop if it tires me. Well, there was a fire
in the picture, burning on the hearth, a bright, cheerful, little fire,
like I used to make of an evening when John Henry came home. And in
front of the fire, granny, was a man throwing buckets full of water on
it to put it out; but the fire was blazing away, and did not seem a bit
the worse for it.'

'That was a queer thing, my dear!' said granny.

'Yes, but Miss Lloyd showed us that, behind the fire, on the other side
of the wall, another was standing; and this one was quietly pouring oil
into the fire to keep it burning. And it never had a chance of going
out, granny, for the oil did it a deal more good than the water did it
harm.'

'Well, my dear,' said grandmother, 'of course it would be so: oil makes
a deal of blaze when it falls on fire; but what has that got to do with
me and my poor old heart?'

But Polly had a bad fit of coughing, and the good old woman would not
let her answer her question till she had had two hours' quiet rest. Then
she seemed brighter again, and was able to go on.

'Miss Lloyd explained it beautiful, granny. She told us the fire was the
work of grace in our hearts. As soon as we trusted our souls to Jesus
to be saved, she said that fire was lighted, the good work was begun.
But then, she said, "Don't forget you've got an enemy. Satan will try to
put the fire out. He'll send somebody to laugh at you, or to plague you
about turning religious. That's one bucket of water! He'll send you a
lot of work to do, to try and make you think you've no time to think
about your soul. That's another bucket of water!" He'll have all sorts
of pleasures, and cares, and difficulties ready, all of them buckets of
water, granny.'

'Ay, my dear, I see that, and I'll be bound there's a bucket not far off
coming on my poor little fire. But what about the oil, my dear?'

'I'm coming to the oil, granny. Satan has his buckets of water, but the
dear Lord has His bottle of oil. It's the Holy Spirit, granny, who alone
can make us good, or keep us good. And if the Lord puts His Holy Spirit
in our hearts, it's of no use Satan trying to put the fire out; he'll
have to give it up for a bad job. Reach me the Testament, granny,
there's a verse I'll read to you.'

She turned over the leaves for some time, and at last she found the
words she wanted, and she put a mark against them, that granny might
find them for herself when she had gone away.

The words were these, 'He which hath begun a good work in you will
perform it until the day of Jesus Christ.'

'Polly, my dear,' said granny, after a pause, 'do you think He'll do
that for me?'

'Do what, granny?'

'Do you think He will give me His Holy Spirit?'

And then Polly's mother gave grandmother another text; but this time she
did not find it, for she knew it by heart, 'If ye then, being evil, know
how to give good gifts unto your children, _how much more_ shall your
Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him?'

Grandmother sat by the side of the bed long after Enoch and Elijah had
fallen asleep. She seemed to have no heart to bustle about that morning.
She wanted to feel sure that her soul was safe.

And when she thought that Poppy's mother was fast asleep, with her
babies lying beside her, granny knelt down and said aloud, 'O Lord, I'm
a poor sinful old woman, but I want Thee to save me. O Lord Jesus, Thou
hast died for me. I trust my soul to Thee. Here it is, I put it into Thy
hands. Oh give me Thy Holy Spirit; keep the fire bright in my soul,
please, Lord Jesus, do. Amen.'

But Poppy's mother was not asleep, she was only lying with her eyes
closed. And as the old woman got up from her knees she smiled, and said
softly,

     'The soul that to Jesus has fled for repose,
      He _will_ not, He _will_ not desert to its foes;
      That soul, though all hell should endeavour to shake,
      He'll never, no never, no never forsake.'

'Amen,' said granny, 'Amen.'




CHAPTER XIII.

POPPY'S FATHER COMES HOME.


The doctor was not wrong. In less than a week the Lord took Poppy's
mother to His beautiful home, where there is no more sickness nor pain.
And grandmother, and Poppy, and little Enoch and Elijah were left
behind. But, as the grandmother and the child stood beside the grave
where her body was laid to rest, they knew that she was far away, safe
in His keeping to whom she had trusted her soul. They knew that she was
well, and happy, and full of joy, and they tried to be glad for her
sake.

Grandmother was anxious to get home, and, as soon as all could be
arranged, she set off with Poppy and the twins. The neighbours were very
kind, and did all they could to help them, and Jack rubbed away
something with his sleeve, which was very like a tear, as he saw their
train steam out of the station.

It was a new life for Poppy. Grandmother lived in a lovely valley, full
of beautiful trees and running brooks, and quiet, peaceful glades, where
in the daytime the squirrels played and the birds sang, where in the dim
evening hours the rabbits came to nibble the grass, and where, at night,
when Poppy and her little brothers were asleep, the solemn old owls sat
in the trees, and called to each other in harsh and ugly voices.

Through the middle of the valley ran a white smooth road, winding in and
out amongst the trees, and on this road came the carriages, driving
quickly along, with the postillions in scarlet coats riding on the
horses in front, and the ladies and gentlemen, who had come to see the
beautiful valley, leaning back in the carriages behind.

It was Poppy's delight to open the gate for these carriages, and in
this way she was able to save her grandmother a good deal of running
about. She used to climb up the hillside, and watch until they were in
sight, and then run down as fast as she could, that she might have the
gate open in time for them to pass through. That was Poppy's work out of
school hours, for grandmother sent her regularly to the pretty little
country school, and would let nothing keep her away from it.

Dear old grandmother! how hard she worked for Poppy and for the babies!
she thought nothing a trouble that she could do for them, and Poppy
loved her more and more every day.

As the months went by, little Enoch and Elijah grew fat and strong; the
fresh country air and the new milk made a wonderful change in them, and,
when the next summer came, they were able to run about, and could climb
on the hillside with Poppy, and gather the wild roses, and the
harebells, and the honeysuckle, and would sit on the bank, near the
cottage, watching the carriages, and trying to catch the pence which the
people threw them as they drove by.

One Saturday afternoon, at the end of the summer, as Poppy was playing
with them outside the lodge, she caught sight of a man coming quickly
down the road. She ran to open the gate for him, but as she did so she
gave a sudden cry of joy. It was her father, her long-lost father, come
home again!

'Why, Poppy,' he said, 'my own dear little woman, what are _you_ doing
here? Come and kiss your poor father, Poppy. And who are these two bonny
little lads?' he asked, as Enoch and Elijah came running up to him.

'They're our babies,' said Poppy. 'God sent them after you went away,
father; they both came on one day.'

'Dear me, dear me; and to think I never knew,' said her father. 'Poor
Polly! And so you've all come to see grandmother. I never thought I
should find you here; I was going home to-morrow. I must run in and see
mother. Is she with grandmother, Poppy?'

See mother! Then he did not know. And Poppy could not tell him. She
followed him with a very grave and sorrowful face, holding little Enoch
and Elijah by the hand.

Grandmother came to the door at the sound of his voice.

'Why, if it isn't my John Henry!' she cried.

'Yes, mother, it's your John Henry, ashamed of himself at last. And so
you've got poor Polly and the bairns here. Where is Polly? I wonder if
she'll ever forgive me?'

'Then you haven't been home yet, John Henry!' was all grandmother could
say.

'No, mother; I only got to Liverpool this morning, and I took you on my
way; I was going home to-morrow.'

'Where's Polly?' he said, pushing past her, and looking first into the
parlour and then into the kitchen. 'Is she upstairs, mother? Polly!
Polly! Polly!'

'John Henry,' said grandmother in a trembling voice, 'Polly has gone
home.'

'Gone home, and left the children behind her!' he exclaimed.

'Ay, my dear,' said his mother, bursting into tears; 'the Lord sent for
her.'

'You don't mean to say she's _dead_, mother!' he moaned.

'Nay, my dear, she is living with the Lord,' said the old woman.

'Oh, mother, mother,' he sobbed, 'to think I left her like that, and she
never knew how sorry I was!'

It was a long, long time before he could speak, or could tell them his
story. He had been in America in dreadful straits and in many dangers.
At length he fell ill with fever, and lay for many weeks at the point of
death, in a log cabin, with only a boy of ten, the son of a poor
emigrant, to do anything for him. But this trouble had shown him his
sin, and he had come to the Lord Jesus for forgiveness, and ever since
then God had blessed him. He had not become a rich man, but he had
earned enough to bring him home, and he had saved a little besides, and
with this he hoped to start life afresh.

'But you'll never rob me of my bairns, John Henry,' said the old woman,
in alarm; 'you'll never take them away, when we've all been so happy
together!'

And the bare possibility of losing the children seemed quite to damp
poor old grandmother's joy in getting her beloved John Henry home again.

'Well, mother, we must see,' he said; 'we must ask God to order for us.'

And God did order most graciously, both for mother and son.

The old woman told her trouble to 'my lady,' the next time that she
drove through the lodge-gates in her pony-carriage, and she was very
sympathising, and most anxious that the children should not have to
leave their happy country home. She mentioned it to the squire, and he
very kindly offered Poppy's father a situation on his estate as
gamekeeper. His life in America had made him far more fit for that kind
of work than for carrying on his old trade, and he was most thankful not
to have to take his children back to the city. So they all lived on
together in the pretty lodge in the lovely valley, a happy little
family, all loving the same Lord, and walking on the road to the same
Home.

But Poppy never forgot her mother. And as Enoch and Elijah grew older,
she would sit with them on the hillside and talk to them about her, and
pointing to the blue sky she would tell them that their mother was
waiting for them there, and would be very much disappointed if they did
not come.

And often, as they sat outside the lodge in the quiet summer evenings,
they and their father would sing together, 'Mother's favourite hymn,'
and dear old grandmother would come to the door, and join in a quavering
voice in the beautiful words:

     'Jesus, I will trust Thee, trust Thee with my soul!
      Guilty, lost, and helpless, Thou canst make me whole.
      There is none in heaven or on earth like Thee;
      Thou hast died for sinners--therefore, Lord, for me.'




THE END.




Butler & Tanner, The Selwood Printing Works, Frome, and London.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Poppy's Presents, by Mrs O. F. Walton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POPPY'S PRESENTS ***

***** This file should be named 29153.txt or 29153.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/1/5/29153/

Produced by Nick Wall, Nadine Margaret Whitcombe and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
