The Project Gutenberg EBook of The American Missionary -- Volume 38, No.
06, June, 1884, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The American Missionary -- Volume 38, No. 06, June, 1884

Author: Various

Release Date: July 31, 2009 [EBook #29556]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AMERICAN MISSIONARY--JUNE, 1884 ***




Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, KarenD, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Cornell University Digital Collections.)






[Illustration:

  The American Missionary

  June, 1884.

  VOL. XXXVIII.

  NO. 6.]

June, 1884.


CONTENTS

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                                PAGE.

  EDITORIAL.

    SEVEN MONTHS--ILLUSTRATED ARTICLE--INDIAN MISSIONS            161
    OUR SPRING ASSOCIATIONS                                       163
    REMEMBER THE POOR                                             165
    CHRISTIAN EDUCATORS IN COUNCIL--SOUTHERN MANUFACTURES         166
    EARLY DAWN--TURN IN THE ROAD--JOHN F. SLATER--BENEFACTIONS    167
    GENERAL NOTES                                                 168


  THE INDIANS.

    THE DAKOTA INDIANS (Illustrated)                              171
    FORTY-FIVE YEARS IN WASHINGTON TERRITORY                      181


  THE CHINESE.

    LETTER FROM OAKLAND, CAL.                                     182


  BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

    LETTERS TO THE SECRETARY                                      183
    ALA. WOMAN'S MISS. ASSOC.                                     184


  THE SOUTH.

    SUNDAY-SCHOOL WORK AT TOUGALOO                                185


  CHILDREN'S PAGE.

    WONG NING'S IDEAS                                             186


  RECEIPTS                                                        187

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N. Y., as second-class
matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

PRESIDENT.

  Hon. Wm. B. WASHBURN, LL.D., Mass.

CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.--Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street,
  N. Y._

ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR COLLECTION.--REV. JAMES POWELL, _56 Reade
  Street, N. Y._

TREASURER.--H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._

AUDITORS.--WM. A. NASH, W. H. ROGERS.


EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

  JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman; A. P. FOSTER, Secretary; LYMAN ABBOTT, A. S.
  BARNES, J. R. DANFORTH, CLINTON B. FISK, S. B. HALLIDAY, EDWARD HAWES,
  SAMUEL HOLMES, CHARLES A. HULL, SAMUEL S. MARPLES, CHARLES L. MEAD, S. H.
  VIRGIN, WM. H. WARD, J. L. WITHROW.


DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

  Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, D.D., _Boston_. Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., _Hartford_.
  Rev. CHARLES W. SHELTON, _Chicago_.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields, to
the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of this "American
Missionary," to Rev. G. D. Pike, D.D., at the New York Office;
letters for the Bureau of Woman's Work, to Miss D. E. Emerson, at the
New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
'American Missionary Association,' of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to
its charitable uses and purposes." The Will should be attested by
three witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER II.

  WORTH
  (Jan. 1, 1883)
  $10,265,632.60.

So says our sworn statement of that year, and the above figures you
will find head the column in statement dated January 1, 1884.

This money value was in the shape of Bonds and Mortgages, Loans,
United States Bonds Real Estate (estimated at cost), and Cash.

Working with this capital, we pushed our business vigorously during
the year 1883, and with what result we will show in chapter three.

Respectfully yours,

  MANHATTAN
  LIFE INSURANCE CO.,
  156 & 158 Broadway, New York.

  HENRY STOKES, President.

  J. L. HALSEY, 1st Vice-P.
  H. B. STOKES, 2d Vice-P.
  H. Y. WEMPLE, Sec'y.
  S. N. STEBBINS, Act'y.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: COUNT RUMFORD]

HORSFORD'S

ACID PHOSPHATE.

(LIQUID.)

FOR DYSPEPSIA, MENTAL AND PHYSICAL EXHAUSTION, NERVOUSNESS,
DIMINISHED VITALITY, URINARY DIFFICULTIES, ETC.

  PREPARED ACCORDING TO THE DIRECTION OF
  Prof. E. N. Horsford, of Cambridge, Mass.

There seems to be no difference of opinion in high medical authority
of the value of phosphoric acid, and no preparation has ever been
offered to the public which seems to so happily meet the general want
as this.

It is not nauseous, but agreeable to the taste.

No danger can attend its use.

Its action will harmonize with such stimulants as are necessary to
take.

It makes a delicious drink with water and sugar only.

Prices reasonable. Pamphlet giving further particulars mailed free on
application.

  MANUFACTURED BY THE
  RUMFORD CHEMICAL WORKS,
  Providence, R. I.,
  AND FOR SALE BY ALL DRUGGISTS.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY

VOL. XXXVIII.     JUNE, 1884.     No. 6.

       *       *       *       *       *

American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Seven Months._--Receipts from collections and donations,
$116,081.44, and from legacies $20,571.35, making a total of
$136,652.79. An increase from collections and donations of $6,905.71
over last year, but a decrease from legacies of $21,640.83, making
the decrease of total receipts for the seven months of $14,744.12. We
must again remind our friends that it is necessary to largely
increase our collections and donations or incur a debt.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR ILLUSTRATED ARTICLE.


It gives us pleasure to place before our readers in this number an
illustrated article on our Dakota Mission. The plates were prepared
for the use jointly of the ILLUSTRATED CHRISTIAN WEEKLY and the
AMERICAN MISSIONARY. The article was written by Rev. Addison P.
Foster, one of our Executive Committee who visited the mission last
year. The popularity of the Indian number of the MISSIONARY which we
issued in April, 1883, leads us to hope that this number will be
welcomed and preserved for use as occasion may offer.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR INDIAN MISSIONS.


Nine schools, with 356 pupils; five churches, with 271 members; five
stations; thirteen missionaries; thirty-seven teachers, are the
statistics. The churches are Congregational, and the church and
school go hand in hand. A careful survey of the necessities of these
missions was made early in the year, and the estimate called for an
appropriation of about $30,000. Repairs and improvements in old
buildings and construction of new buildings, imperatively demanded
for the efficient prosecution of the work, forbade a lower estimate.

In surrendering our African missions, obedient to the voice of the
churches that our appeal might be simplified, we gave up the proceeds
of invested funds that in large part sustained that work; while in
receiving from the American Board its Indian missions, there was
placed just so much additional demand upon our treasury. Our
inevitable outlook was a trilemma--either enlarged receipts, or
retrenchment, or debt.

We therefore sent to about fifteen hundred Congregational ministers
in February last a printed circular asking:

First--Shall we raise this year $30,000 for our mission work among
the Indians?

Second--Will you aid, and how?

Up to date we have received 206 replies. To the first question the
answers are nearly all in the affirmative; most of them strong and
positive, a few cautious and questioning.

To the second, 33 responded with immediate contributions; 43 promised
an increase in the regular church collections, 71 a special
contribution from the missionary concert, and 3 the proceeds of a
lecture.

The replies are representative. Ministers in charge of the strong
churches, and those in charge of the weaker, speak the same language
of encouragement. "Go ahead." "Forward! is the word." "We will back
you." "It is no more than fair that those who have hitherto sustained
these Indian missions through the A. B. C. F. M. should now turn
their hand into the A. M. A. to increase its funds for this work."
"Thirty thousand dollars will do more and better work than so many
muskets." "We love your work and will aid you all we can." Such are
the sentiments these letters breathe. From all parts of the country
they come. California strikes hands with Massachusetts, Washington
Territory and Utah range themselves with Florida, all of them wishing
us God-speed, and promising help in our Indian work. We are glad to
have received such encouragement as these letters give, and sincerely
thank our brethren who took the trouble and time to answer our
inquiries. We trust that none of them will fail to see that the
promises are fulfilled. There will be in some cases need of special
remembrance. Interests crowd in these days. Even what is lawful and
regular has to fight for recognition. There are others who have not
answered our questions, upon whose co-operation to bring up that
$30,000 we also rely. We hope that as they read these lines their
eyes will detect the special appeal, implied, though not expressed,
that is here made to them. We commend anew the claims of these
important missions to our friends, and again remind them that if we
are to worthily do this enlarged work they must come up to our help
with enlarged contributions.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR SPRING ASSOCIATIONS.

REV. J. E. ROY, D.D.


There were four of them, those of Alabama, at Montgomery; of
Louisiana, at New Orleans; of Mississippi, at Meridian; and of North
Carolina, at Dudley. The first three came the first part of April;
the last came the 1st of May. Alabama received two new ministers,
Revs. A. J. Headen and C. L. Harris, and two new churches, those of
Birmingham and Tecumseh, places of large iron and coal interests.
Louisiana received the Church of Chocahula and Rev. Byron Gunner. The
meetings of Alabama have come to the dignity of State Anniversaries,
those of the Sunday-school Association, of the Association of
Churches, and of the Woman's Missionary Association, which this year
transferred its auxiliaryship from the Boston W. H. M. A. to the
Woman's Bureau of the A. M. A. The Sunday-school body took a day for
its reports, addresses and discourses. Among other valuable
contributions was that of Mrs. Ash, widow of the late Rev. W. H. Ash,
upon the dress and deportment of the teacher. The body representing
the churches and the ministers came up to its own high-water mark of
intellectual force and spiritual tone. Among the practical subjects
discussed was that of the relation of the churches toward secret
societies. In the whole discussion not a word was offered in defense
of the clandestine orders. It would have done Brother Fee good to
have heard the fearless discussion. The church of Montgomery, under
the care of Rev. R. C. Bedford, was found in a prosperous condition,
ten members being received during the sessions of the body. Prof. G.
W. Andrews, an early pastor of the church, had the pleasure of
baptizing into the church a lad of thirteen, who had been named after
himself, George Whitefield. Prof. Andrews also delivered an address
upon the Mission of Congregationalism in the South, which was the
feature of the week of services. Upon invitation three of the leading
white churches of the city were supplied on the Lord's Day, those of
Dr. Petrie, First Presbyterian, Dr. Andrew, First Methodist, and Dr.
Woodfin, First Baptist--the service being rendered by Revs. O. W.
Fay, G. W. Andrews and J. E. Roy. Four white families extended
hospitality and four white pastors came into the meetings. And so
recognition is coming along.

The Louisiana Association met with Rev. Isaac Hall's church, which
with paint and fresco had put its house of worship into beautiful
condition. Dr. W. S. Alexander was elected Moderator for the eighth
year. A member of his church, a converted Catholic, was licensed that
he might preach among the French-speaking colored people in the city
of New Orleans. The account of his conversion was extremely
interesting, showing how, by the word of God, he had worked out of
Romish superstitions and had "found out what it was to be born
again." During the sessions, by a proper Council, Mr. Byron Gunner,
of the Theological Department of Talladega College, was examined and
ordained to serve as pastor at New Iberia, the place where the
Acadians settled and Whittier's "Evangeline" drifted in search of her
lover. Dr. Alexander preached the sermon and Rev. R. C. Bedford, of
Montgomery, gave the charge. The venerable brother, Rev. Daniel Clay,
preached the opening sermon on the text, "Fear not, little flock, for
it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom."

The whole body was at the Boarding Hall of the Straight University
for a lunch, when the President made the members a fine present of
books from a Northern society.

The meeting of the Mississippi body was the second, and it revealed a
maturing process. President Pope and Professor Hatch represented
Tougaloo University--the president preaching a sermon on Christian
Industry, and the professor reading a capital paper on Revivals. Rev.
C. L. Harris, of Jackson, preached the opening sermon. He is finding
a wide and effectual door at the Capital of the State. Pastor Grice,
at Meridian, is encouraged by the assistance of Miss M. E. Green, a
lady missionary. Miss A. D. Gerrish serves in the same capacity at
New Orleans. At the meeting in the last named city, Miss E. B. Emery,
from Maine, gave an impressive talk upon Woman's Mission Work. Misses
Sperry and Wilcox, teachers, followed with words of confirmation. In
Mississippi three or four promising fields are opening for the School
and Church process, and these will be entered and occupied as soon as
may be.

The Old North State held its fifth annual meeting on the first four
days of May, at Dudley. This was a place at which the colored people,
during the Ku-Klux terror, "refugeed," making there a stand for
life--the hunted creatures at bay. Early the A. M. A. opened here its
Mission School and Church. Difficulties, peculiar to the
heterogeneous material thus gathered, have gradually been overcome,
until now the gospel is in the ascendant as an assimilating force.
The church and school under Rev. J. E. B. Jewett and his wife, of
Pepperell, Mass., are in a high degree of prosperity. The New England
Academy Principal seems especially adapted to these children of toil.
The Association had the round of discussions, essays, devotional
meetings. The National Council and the annual meeting of the A. M. A.
were duly reported. The new Confession of Faith was heartily
approved. A memorial service for the late Rev. Islay Walden, a native
of North Carolina, was a marked feature of the occasion. The great
work he had accomplished for his people in so short a time was
instructive and encouraging to the other young ministers, and to the
young people of the Assembly. Mrs. Elenora Walden continues the
school work of her husband, greatly confided in by the people. Rev.
Zachariah Simmons takes up the pastoral work. Three delegates from
Strieby and Troy had _walked_ 130 miles for want of money to pay the
railroad fare. Three new school-house churches were reported--those
of Pekin, Oaks and Hillsboro, the last two having been dedicated by
the Field Superintendent on the Saturday and Sunday previous. Sermons
were preached by Revs. D. D. Dodge, G. S. Smith (Moderator), J. E.
Roy and Z. Simmons. Deacon Henry Clay Jones, of Raleigh, made a
flaming temperance speech, claiming that 60,000 Prohibition voters
held the balance of power, which, as a third party, could and should
overmaster the 100,000 majority that went against home protection.

       *       *       *       *       *

REMEMBER THE POOR.


When Paul and Barnabas were about to set forth to labor among the
heathen, Cephas, James and John gave them the right hand of
fellowship with a charge included in these words: "Only that they
would remember the poor." How they should do it had been indicated by
Him who said of his own labors "the poor have the gospel preached to
them."

The expression "the poor" is comprehensive. All human wants relate to
it. The poverty of some, however, is more complete than that of
others, and the poorest have early, if not the first, claim to
attention. The Pauls and Barnabases of our times may justly listen to
appeals which arise from the following conditions:

1. Ignorance. In this country it may be said ignorance is the mother
of poverty. Indeed, ignorance is one of the worst forms of poverty.
Intelligence among the masses, coupled with true religion, would soon
abolish it. Whatever is lacking of knowledge of God, of what He has
promised, of what He has made for us, of what we can do for
ourselves, must be supplied. It was an observation of Dean Stanley
that we ought to teach the heathen how to count three before
attempting to instruct them as to the doctrine of the Trinity. The
great Preacher was the great Teacher also. If there be the greatest
ignorance South, the appeal from the South to us to remember the poor
is urgent and imperative.

2. Poverty. Where a large proportion of the people can neither read
nor write, there nothing but a fractional supply for human wants is
to be expected. Inadequate buildings meagerly furnished, insufficient
clothing for the young, lack of medical care and neglect of the aged
and infirm--these are evil conditions only too common all over the
South, rendering much that ministers to a thrifty and manly character
impossible, as things are now. Where there is the greatest sickness,
privation and want, there apostles to the poor have legitimate field
for labor. Is there any such field in our country as that presented
at the South?

3. Vice. It is admitted that ignorance and poverty beget vice.
According to recent statistics, gathered from the whole country, it
is shown that the illiterate classes commit more than ten times
their pro rata of crime. The missionary must stay the progress of
vice, drying up its sources as best he may, and uncapping the
fountains of life. To do this he must impart knowledge and preach the
gospel.

If, in consequence of the ignorance and poverty of the people South,
there is vice and crime unparalleled in the annals of our country; if
these things combined constitute a poverty unknown elsewhere in the
land when estimated by its extent, then those who seek the poorest
will not neglect the millions in the Southern States.

It is our work, as an Association, to do what we can to render these
people the help needful. Will not the friends of Christ help us
"remember the poor?"

       *       *       *       *       *

CHRISTIAN EDUCATORS IN COUNCIL is the title of a pamphlet of 266
pages, giving full report of sixty addresses by American educators at
Ocean Grove last August, arranged topically as follows: I. Education
and Man's Improvement. II. Illiteracy in the United Slates. III.
National Aid to Common Schools. IV. The Negro in America. V.
Illiteracy, Wealth, Pauperism, and Crime. VI. The American Indian
Problem. VII. The American Mormon Problem. VIII. Education in the
South since the War. IX. Christ in American Education. Tables:
Illiterate and Educational Status, United States, 1880. Rev. J. C.
Hartzell, D.D., the editor and compiler, purposes to issue a second
edition for general circulation. He may be addressed at the Methodist
Book Concern, New York. We know of no one document of equal value, on
the subjects discussed. The price is one dollar.

       *       *       *       *       *

SOUTHERN MANUFACTURES.


An account of the Southern manufacturing and mining enterprises for
January and February is given in the _Manufacturers' Record_, and
illustrates the growing thrift of these industries in the South.
Kentucky shows the largest aggregate, which foots up $6,851,000.
Alabama is second with 5,210,000; Virginia, 3,830,000; Texas,
3,593,000; Georgia, 2,074,000; Maryland, 2,015,000; North Carolina,
1,227,000; West Virginia, 916,000; South Carolina, 904,000;
Tennessee, 846,000, and the other States a little less than 500,000
each. The cotton mills begun since January will cost over $325,000,
and will add more than a hundred thousand spindles to the number now
in the South. The Eagle and Phoenix Mills, Columbus, Ga., intend to
erect a new structure at the cost of $1,000,000. At Rome, Ga., and at
Birmingham, Ala., new cotton mills to cost $100,000 each are about to
be erected. Confidence, which can only spring from intelligence and
Christianity, is the one thing needful in order to secure the capital
wanted for the development of the vast manufacturing interests of the
southern portion of our country.

THE EARLY DAWN is the title of a paper published at Good Hope
Station, Sherbro Island, under the management of Rev. Mr. Gomer, the
colored Superintendent of the Mendi and Shengay Missions, now in
charge of the United Brethren in Christ. THE EARLY DAWN is welcomed.

       *       *       *       *       *

A TURN IN THE ROAD.


Gov. McDaniel, of Georgia, has commuted the death sentences of two
negroes. One of these, it is said, had no fair chance of defense, and
the other killed the invader of his domestic peace, for which offence
the Governor said he would never allow a man to be hanged. It is to
Mr. McDaniel's credit that this clemency was exercised in full view
of the desperate efforts which have been made for more than a year to
save from the gallows one Turner, a man of influential family, for
whose crime there was no excuse. All recourses of appeal to the
courts having been exhausted, Turner's friends are bringing every
pressure to bear to have the Governor give him a "negro's chance,"
but that official has decided to let the law take its course.

       *       *       *       *       *

JOHN F. SLATER.


The death of Mr. Slater, which occurred at Norwich, Conn., May 6,
removes one of our foremost philanthropists. His well-known gift of a
million dollars for the emancipated race in America was made after
years of converse with eminent scholars, statesmen, capitalists and
Christian philanthropists. The act was in every sense deliberate. His
successful business career, extending over many years, his knowledge
of men, gained by his relations with business interests in the great
centers of trade; by his employment of large numbers of laborers; by
his observations while traveling at home and abroad--gave him
opportunity to reach the best conclusions as to what people in our
land were the most needy, and where the gifts would yield the most
abundant results. He took a business man's view of the subject, and
has left an expression of judgment, supported by a princely
benefaction, of great value to others who are prayerfully considering
how they may best promote the interests of Christian civilization.
Modest, consistent, dignified, courteous, a regular attendant at a
Congregational church, a good neighbor, a good citizen beloved--such
was John F. Slater. He has left a name better and more enduring than
his great riches.

       *       *       *       *       *

BENEFACTIONS.


The late Lucius J. Knowles bequeathed $5,000 to Doane College,
Nebraska, and $10,000 to Carlton College, Minnesota.

A professorship at Williams College, in honor of Dr. Mark Hopkins,
has been provided for by subscriptions amounting to $25,000.

The New York University is to receive $5,000 from the estate of the
late Augustus Schell, and the New York Historical Society $5,000.

Mrs. Louisa L. Vought, besides other gifts to the Protestant
Episcopal Church, left $10,000 for work among the colored people
South, and $1,000 for the Indians.

Harvard College is to receive $5,000 for the astronomical observatory
connected with that institution, from the estate of the late Thomas
G. Appleton.

The Yale Corporation has voted to accept $50,000 from the Frederick
Marquand fund for a chapel for the use of the College Young Men's
Christian Association.

Knox College is to receive about $60,000 from the estate of the late
H. H. Hitchcock, of Galesburg, Ill.

Mrs. Oswald Ottendorfer, of New York, bequeathed $50,000 for a German
teachers' seminary in Milwaukee.

Hon. John R. Bodwell, of Hallowell, Me., gives $1,000 toward the new
building for Industrial School for Girls in that city.

_Persons desirous to help where help is most needed, to help where it
will do most to promote national prosperity and true religion, may
well consider the question of endowments for the educational
institutions of the A. M. A._

       *       *       *       *       *

GENERAL NOTES


AFRICA.

--The two brothers Denhardt, already known by their previous
explorations, are preparing an expedition to the Dana, which they
will reascend to reach Kenia.

--The Universities' Mission has constructed for the eastern side of
Nyassa a steamer which will bear the name of _Charles Janson_, a
missionary recently deceased.

--Messrs. Taylor and Jacques, missionaries at Saint Louis, have made
in the Oualo, inhabited by emigrants and the Wolofs mussulmen, a
journey of exploration with a view to the extension of their field of
activity.

--The French Consul at Tangier has interdicted his French subjects,
and the mussulmen placed under his protection, from buying, selling
or possessing the slaves of the Maroe. His example has been followed
by the representatives of other powers.

--General Bacouch, a great proprietor in Tunis, encourages, in a
domain of many thousands of acres, the cultivation of a plant
imported from Java, which may replace the cotton of America.

--Messrs. Lindner and Von der Broock, in the service of the
International African Association, have set out from Zanzibar for
the Congo, taking with them 200 negroes to replace those whose term
of engagement has expired.

--According to the Natal _Mercantile Advertiser_, the German
Government has charged M. A. Schultz, of Durban, with making an
exploration with a view to establishing a series of commercial
stations as far as Zambeze and the Congo. He will be accompanied by a
surveyor and a geologist.

--M. Lagarde has been charged with proceeding to the limits of the
Territory of Obock, in connection with M. Conneau, Commander of the
_Infernet_. This same ship carries out the members of a scientific
mission sent to the Choa. It bears presents to King Menelik.

--James Roxburgh, the engineer appointed to accompany the sections of
the steamer _Bonne Nouvelle_, has announced to the London Missionary
Society his safe arrival at Liendwe upon the borders of Tanganyika,
the place designed to launch the vessel. He met there Capt. Hore and
Mr. Swan, who will immediately commence the reconstruction of the
boat.

--Major Machado, who has been at Pretoria with Portuguese engineers
to make the plan of the railroad upon the Territory of Transvaal, has
received orders from Lisbon to proceed to Lorenzo-Marquez to confer
with the engineers sent by the Portuguese Government, to the end that
they may commence the work from the Bay of Delogoa to the frontier of
Transvaal.

--The _Bulletin of Colonial Inquiry_ announces that ten army surgeons
from Africa have formed an association for the establishment of
French colonies in the district of Saida, 171 kilometers to the south
of Oran. Each shareholder will furnish a capital of 6,000 francs, and
the society will be conducted in an economical manner, but with the
best conditions for starting.

--According to the Arab journal _Noussret_, the Negous has ordered
the Governor of Axoum to hold ready provisions, and beasts of burden,
as also ammunition, so that they may have means of passage with the
army to the coast to take possession of the territories which Egypt
has laid open to them.


THE CHINESE.

--The Baptist Chinese Mission, Portland, Oregon, has over two hundred
Chinese connected with it, several of whom are women and children.

Seventy different Chinese have been connected with the school at
Santa Cruz, Cal. Five of the pupils have been baptized and received
to the Congregational Church. Two more will soon be baptized. This
little company of Chinese Christians is full of life, of prayer and
of eager liberality.

--About forty Chinamen are under instruction in Philadelphia in
connection with the Sunday Schools of the Episcopal Church. They
have undertaken to send thirty dollars annually to endow a bed in the
hospital at Wuchang, China.

--The Chinese Young Mens' Christian Association in Oakland, Cal.,
co-operates in preparing converted Chinamen for church membership.
Converts in the Sunday-schools are referred to the officers of the
Association, who are themselves Chinamen. After six months' probation
the candidates are brought before the Church Committee by the Y. M.
C. A. and the officers of the Sunday-school, and, if report is
favorable, they are received into the Church.

--"As to the yellow races," says the _Spectator_, "who ought to be
just lazier than Europeans, they beat them altogether. We suppose
there are indolent Chinese, but the immense majority of that vast
people have an unparalleled power of work, care nothing about hours,
and, so long as they are paid, will go on with a dogged steady
persistence in toil for sixteen hours a day such as no European can
rival. No English ship-carpenter will work like a Chinese, no
laundress will wash as many clothes, and a Chinese compositor would
be very soon expelled for over-toil by an English 'chapel' of the
trade."


THE INDIANS.

--At some points the Government has issued to Indians what are called
scholars' rations, in order to assure school attendance, accompanying
teaching with gifts of loaves and fishes almost literally.

--Agent Miles, of the Osage Indians has secured the passage of a law
cutting off annuities from all Osage children between seven and
fourteen, who do not attend school. These Indians have a Congress of
their own.

--The Indian children of Forest Grove, Oregon, publish a paper edited
by themselves, called "The Indian Citizen." It is in the interest of
the Forest Grove school.

--The Presbyterians commenced their work in Kansas by the
establishment of a Mission among the Indians. They now have 300
churches in that state.

--The Indian boys at the Hampton Institute have a debating society
for the purpose of encouraging each other in speaking English. The
topic for the first night, over which two exercised their powers in
the new language was, "Shall we allow the white men in our
reservation?" There is also a debating society among the girls in
Winona Lodge.

--A Canadian Indian was recently seized by a party of masked
Americans and hanged within the borders of the Dominion, in British
Columbia, and the matter having come to the ears of the Government at
Ottawa the question has been considered, and satisfaction is to be
demanded of the United States Government.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE INDIANS.

[Illustration: INDIAN FAMILY AT FORT BERTHOLD, DAKOTA TERRITORY.]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DAKOTA INDIANS.

BY REV. ADDISON P. FOSTER.


It was my rare good fortune last summer to spend nearly a month in a
trip of investigation among the Dakota Indians. A record of
observations thus made may perhaps be of interest.

Across the Missouri, in Northern Nebraska, is a reservation about
twelve miles square on which are located the Santees. These Indians
came originally from Minnesota, and were concerned in the terrible
New Ulm massacre there. This was years ago. After that bloody
outbreak a large number of Indians were imprisoned. While thus
incarcerated they were deeply moved by the truths of religion. The
long and faithful labors of Drs. Riggs and Williamson bore fruit, and
very many were truly converted. These Minnesota Indians were
subsequently removed, a portion to the Sisseton Agency, a portion to
Flandreau, and a portion to the Santee Agency. At this last-named
spot the Indians are practically civilized. They wear the white man's
dress; they cultivate farms of their own; they sustain two churches,
one Episcopal and one Congregational, the latter having its excellent
native pastor and an outlying chapel where the native deacons conduct
meetings in turn; they have recently, to the number of fifty, taken
up land under the homestead laws and now own them in fee simple.
There are three boarding schools on the reservation, one sustained by
the American Missionary Association and in the charge of the Rev. A.
L. Riggs, another sustained by the Episcopalians, under the
jurisdiction of Bishop Hare, and a third supported by the Government,
of which Rev. Charles Seccombe, a Congregationalist, is principal.
The work in all these schools is admirable. The children are neat,
intelligent, attractive, orderly, and studious, and while not as far
advanced nor as quick, will compare favorably with the children of
schools among white people. The development of Indian character under
these Christianizing influences was remarkably shown in a visit to
one of the cottages on the mission. Here dwell one of the native
teachers, her mother and grandmother. The aged grandmother in her
whole appearance bespoke the wild Indian. Gray and bent with age, she
loved best to sit on the floor in a corner, after the fashion of her
people. The mother, a comely matron of perhaps forty-five, was
evidently more cultivated, was lady-like in her appearance, and had
lines of thoughtfulness on her thin face. The work of civilization
had made great advance in her. But the daughter, a young lady of
eighteen, well educated, knowing only the ways of civilization, was
as thoroughly refined and bright and attractive as the young ladies
of our own Christian homes.

[Illustration: INDIAN BURYING GROUND.]

At Oahe, fifteen miles west of Pierre, Dakota Territory, is a second
mission station, under the charge of the American Missionary
Association. Up and down the river, on what is known as the Peoria
Bottom, are perhaps a hundred families of Indians, each living on
their own homesteads, off reservation limits, cultivating their
farms, dwelling in comfortable log-houses, dressed in civilized garb,
and showing as much neatness and industry as the average white man.
These people are recognized as citizens and are voters. They have a
neat chapel, a native pastor, sustain admirable prayer-meetings--a
woman's prayer-meeting among them--and live good reputable lives. In
this spot and at Santee Agency the Indian is seen at his best. Life
and property are respected, the land is fairly tilled, the homes are
happy, intelligence is general, and religion is the universal
motive-power.

[Illustration: WIGWAMS AMONG THE SIOUX.]

On the west side of the Missouri in Dakota lies the great Sioux
Reservation, containing 8,000 Indians at the Pine Ridge Agency,
nearly 8,000 at the Rosebud Agency, 1,500 of the Lower Brule Indians,
3,000 along the Cheyenne River and northward, and nearly 4,000 on the
Standing Rock Agency. It was my fortune to visit a number of villages
on the Cheyenne, Morrow, and Grand Rivers and at Standing Rock. The
Indians at these places are all wild--that is, still wear blankets,
breech-cloths, and leggings, feathers and geegaws, do little toward
cultivating the land, and are ignorant heathen. A Sabbath in a
village on the Cheyenne showed what wild Indians were. The morning
opened with two men disguised in buffalo-skins with the heads on,
running through the village. They had had a dream, were supposed to
be possessed of spirits, and as they chased the villagers all ran
from them, affrighted lest some witchcraft be wrought by them.
Presently the church-bell rang at the missionary's tent, and fifty
Indians came in, gaudy in paints and wampum, ornaments, and dangling
queues tied up with mink-skins, the chief wearing a broken down
beaver hat with a faded weed upon it, and the rest supplied with fans
of eagles' wings, pipes, and other accompaniments of Indian
gentlemen. They listened with occasional grunts of approval during
worship, and filed out at the close with a cordial handshake, one
remaining, named from his height Touch-the-Clouds, to say that he
felt the importance of this new way, and that he wished for himself
and his people schools and churches. This was encouraging, but as the
evening came on there set up a hideous noise; a dance was in
progress, and all night long a relay of three Indians kept up the
hideous and monotonous tom-tom of their kettle-drums, while the
shrill scream of the women pierced the air.

The next morning were things equally painful. A young Indian woman,
with four children to care for, put away by her cruel husband for
another wife, came to beg the missionary's influence to secure for
her Government rations. A tent hard by was visited, where the family,
in accordance with Indian superstitions, were gathering, and had been
for a year or two, all sorts of valuable articles for presents in
honor of some deceased member of the household, intending by-and-by
to distribute all these things, leaving themselves beggared. And last
of all, in a neighboring village were seen three men and a boy, clad
with a few feathers in their hair, and yellow ochre on their bodies,
going through mummeries in the sight of a large company. They were
"making mystery," whatever that may be.

[Illustration: INDIAN GIRLS AT SANTEE NORMAL TRAINING SCHOOL.]

At Standing Rock were Sitting Bull and Chief Gall, with their bands.
Not many years ago they had been on the war path; they were concerned
in the Custer massacre; but now they are in wholesome awe of the
Government and dependent on Government favor for daily bread.
Consequently they are orderly and peaceable, and though a few years
since it would have been dangerous for three unarmed men to pass
through their reservations, it was perfectly safe last summer for a
missionary speaking the Indian language and his friends.

[Illustration: INDIAN IN NATIVE DRESS, FORT BERTHOLD.]

A third class of Indians was found at Fort Berthold. This reservation
is a hundred miles north of Bismarck, Dakota Territory, on the east
side of the Missouri. There are three small tribes combined in one
large village for protection against their ancient enemies the Sioux,
namely, the Arickarees, the Mandans, and the Gros Ventres. These
Indians have latterly made great advances in civilization. They have
800 acres under cultivation, all looking admirably and well fenced
in, and they are taking great pride in their work and asking for more
land to cultivate. They have comfortable homes, or "lodges," as they
are called, made in an octagonal form, of logs completely covered
with earth. They are eagerly obtaining from the Government such
comforts of civilization as they can--reapers, cooking-stoves,
baking-powder, and the like. And yet this people display some of the
grossest elements of savagery. Polygamy is common. The disgusting
scaffold burials still go on, and the air in the neighborhood of the
village is sometimes foul from the adjacent cemetery. Buffalo heads
and poles with red streamers, as offerings or invocations to spirits,
surmount many of the lodges and bear witness to the heathenism of the
people. Many of the men are terribly scarred on the shoulders, breast
and arms with the cruel practices of the sun dance. Men and women
alike wear the dress of their savage life. There has been as yet
little success from schools or church work. Few care for schools, and
the attendance at the mission chapel is not large. The fault,
however, is not with the devoted missionaries, Rev. C. L. Hall and
his helpers of the American Missionary Association, whose
faithfulness is unsurpassed, but with bad white men who visit the
village. For years these Indians have been brought in contact with
some of the worst influences of civilization, and in consequence the
women have become gross, the men have lost their sense of honor, and
the people are manifestly more degraded and harder to reach than the
wild Indians on the Sioux Reservation.

After observation of these three types of Indians, the Christianized,
the wild and the polluted, certain conclusions were inevitable.

1. There is a natural nobility in the Indian character. The Indian is
debased by heathenism and his wild life, lazy, improvident, filthy,
obscene and cruel; and yet he is well endowed by nature with brains
and heart and conscience. He is clear-headed and generous; he is
often affectionate in his family; he is capable of becoming
industrious, conscientious, scholarly, and thoroughly consecrated. If
his wild life has affected him unfavorably, it has not done him the
same kind of harm that slavery has to the colored man. He is not
crushed in spirit and ambition as was the colored slave at the time
of the civil war.

[Illustration: INDIAN WOMAN AT FORT BERTHOLD.]

[Illustration: INDIAN LODGE AT FORT BERTHOLD.]

2. There, as elsewhere, the gospel proves the most efficient
instrumentality. The United States Government is doing a noble work
for the elevation of the race by introducing the agencies of
civilization. The Indian agents in Dakota are, as a rule, noble men,
vieing with the missionaries in endeavors to benefit the race. The
Board of Indian Commissioners are deserving of all praise for their
great services. The present system of Government management in
establishing schools, in encouraging agriculture, in discountenancing
savage practices, in stimulating the home-life, is most admirable.
But Christian efforts are yet more efficacious. It is where the
gospel has sway the longest, or has been the chief influence, that
the Indians are the most elevated.

[Illustration: SANTEE INDIANS TEN YEARS AGO.]

3. It cannot be questioned that we have come to a new stage in Indian
affairs. At last there is throughout the country almost complete
control of the wild Indians. The day of Indian wars is over. We may
very likely never have another. Now that the buffalo has largely
disappeared, the Indian is dependent on the Government supplies for
food and clothing, unless, like the white man, he resorts to
agriculture. In consequence, without any large display of military
force, the Indian agents are able to preserve excellent order on the
reservations. The Indians feel their dependence and recognize the
power of the Government. If fairly treated by the white man they will
give us little trouble hereafter. It is easy to see that
modifications in their condition, all looking toward civilization,
are constantly taking place. They are giving up their Indian dress.
It is now rare to find an Indian whose dress is not in some way
conformed to the white man's. They are learning the comforts of
civilization through the supplies from Government, and welcome the
frame house, the sugar and syrup, the flour and beans, the tools and
clothing which come to them from this source. They feel the pressure
of the white population crowding upon them from every side. They see
their wild life is a thing of the past, and while there are selfish,
vicious, superstitious and conservative influences strongly at work
against the change, still the change goes on. Their more thoughtful
men, perceiving the necessity of the change and recognizing its
advantage, are urging the establishment of schools and churches among
them. There can be little doubt that as these processes continue the
tribal relation will eventually cease, the reservation system will be
abandoned, the Indian will come under ordinary laws, he will be
assigned land in severalty, will cultivate it for his support, and
become citizen. Already this is true of many Indians, and the day is
not far distant--I venture to prophesy that it is within the next
twenty years--when, if these influences continue, the Indian will be
so thoroughly absorbed among his white brethren that as a separate
race he will be lost to sight, and the Indian question will be a
question no more.

[Illustration: INDIAN IN NATIVE DRESS, FORT BERTHOLD.]

A word now in explanation of the illustrations accompanying this
article. An Indian chief is prominent in the first cut. His son is on
horseback beside him. His wives and younger children are seated on
the ground. The influence of civilization already appears in the
dress of these people and in their use of cattle. The second cut
represents a small portion of the large burying-ground at Fort
Berthold. The wigwams in the third cut are mostly of skin, but
generally canvas furnished by the Government is now used. The
arrangement of poles and the desolate appearance of the tents
scattered here and there are true to life. In the sixth cut the heavy
earrings and necklace are of wampum and very valuable. The dress,
while cut in Indian fashion, is, like nearly all that the Indians now
wear, furnished by the Government. The Indian in the fifth cut wears
his hair long and tied up in two queues, with mink-skin pendants. His
constant companion, a pipe of red pipe-clay, is in his lap. The lodge
in the seventh cut admirably represents the peculiar homes of Fort
Berthold Indians. It is very large, and sometimes divided into
several rooms inside. It is well constructed as a protection against
the severe winters of Northern Dakota.

[Illustration: INDIAN BOYS AT SANTEE NORMAL TRAINING SCHOOL.]

On the top of the lodge an Indian is standing. For many years the
Indians of Fort Berthold have been accustomed thus to look out across
the Missouri, on the watch, lest their ancient enemies, the Sioux,
steal upon them unaware. Beside the Indian may be seen the wicker
framework of a "bull boator," skin coracle. The Indians can seize
these in a moment, run with them on their heads to the river, and
paddle across the Missouri with ease after a deer or a buffalo. In
the foreground is a _travoir_, or Indian wagon, made of two poles
with a pouch of leather thongs slung between them. A pony rather than
a dog ordinarily drags this. Another cut represents the Santee Indian
as he was a few years ago. He now lives in a comfortable log-house,
or often in a frame house given him by the Government. In the last
cut are very good likenesses of two girls who are now at the Normal
Training School sustained by the American Missionary Associates at
Santee. They are pure-blooded Indians. Their father is a chief at
Fort Berthold, who has turned from his wild life to become a regular
attendant at church and a thoughtful imitator of the white man's
ways.

[Illustration: DAUGHTERS OF INDIAN CHIEF "POOR WOLF."]

Two other cuts represent groups of school-children at Santee, all
Indians. The artist has not exaggerated the bright and attractive
look upon their faces. They come from all parts of Dakota and the
Santee Reservation. In the ninth cut is represented an Indian who,
with a white man's shirt, retains his native leggings, blanket,
necklace and tomahawk.

       *       *       *       *       *

FORTY-FIVE YEARS IN WASHINGTON TERRITORY.

REV. CUSHING EELS, D.D.


From August 1838, to Sept., 1883, a period of more than 45
consecutive years, I was a resident of what is now Oregon and
Washington Territory. I spent the greater part of those years in what
is included in Washington Territory.

I was employed during the first ten years in mission work under the
patronage of the American Board in behalf of the Spokane Indians.

The massacre of Marcus Whitman, M.D., and others in the Walla Walla
Valley, Nov., 1847, was followed by war which necessitated the
removal in 1848 of all Protestants from the mission field east of the
Cascade Mountains. By military proclamation, June, 1848, the country
named was declared closed against missionaries. It remained thus
eleven years. June, 1859, by military proclamation, the Walla Walla
country was declared open for settlement.

In July of that year I, as agent of the A. B. C. F. M., went to Walla
Walla to look after their interests. Standing beside the grave of the
distinguished patriot and martyr, Dr. Whitman, I purposed to attempt
the erection of a monument to his memory in the form of a school of
high Christian character. The following Spring, 1860, I commenced
work in fulfillment of the plan named. During the next 12 years the
execution of that plan was with me all-controlling. In pursuance of
said object I recently returned to my native New England.

During my sojourn in Walla Walla from 1860 to 1872 I was favored with
opportunities for the measurable prosecution of evangelistic work
among the Spokane Indians. In May, 1872, my house at the place
formerly occupied by Dr. Whitman was consumed by fire.

My elder son had previously been nominated by the American Missionary
Association as Indian agent and confirmed by Government. Previous to
his taking charge the Lord's day had been distinguished for the
performance of outlandish wickedness. With the new agent there was
change of employes. A weekly prayer meeting was appointed and
conducted. With a good degree of constancy it has been continued to
the present time. A Sunday-school was organized. It is continued with
sustained interest.

Soon after the burning of my house in Walla Walla, Agent Eells
hastened thither and took his mother to his home. Early the following
autumn I joined dear ones at Skokomish. A new departure was named. In
pursuance thereof, with the interpreter, a devout Indian, I conducted
divine service at the Indian village. It was continued with
gratifying results.

In July, 1874, a church composed of whites and Indians was organized.
I was chosen pastor. About that time my younger son, Rev. Myron
Eells, arrived at Skokomish, with the intention of making a brief
stop. To me my early Indian charge, the Spokanes, together with the
sparse white settlements in the vicinity, were attractive. I resigned
the charge at Skokomish. It was committed to Rev. M. Eells. The seed
of the word cast among Spokane Indians did not spring up quickly. It
had slow growth, but a rich harvest has been gathered. But I may not
enlarge. From my experience and observation the so-called peace
policy, when fairly tested, is a success. Connected therewith the
ideas and work of the A. M. A. are specially applicable to efforts
for the elevation of the Indian. In my judgment the vexed Indian
problem may thereby be solved--solved to the mutual profit of our
Government and the Indian.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTER FROM OAKLAND, CAL.

BY REV. GEO. MOOAR, D.D.


There is little more for me to do in noting down my observation of
the work of A. M. A. among the Chinese here than to indorse the
statements made by the Rev. Dr. McLean in the April number of this
magazine. As far as the school work for the Chinese in the English
language is concerned, the honor of beginning it belongs, I think, to
Mrs. Elizabeth L. Lynde, now deceased, a member of the First
Congregational Church in this city at the time. Her heart, which was
singularly alert in behalf of the neglected and unfortunate, set her
in the year 1867 to teaching two or three Chinese at her house. These
were servants in families. Meantime the boy employed in my own
house--since favorably known as our chief helper in missionary work,
Jee Gam--was spelling out, by the aid of my little girls and their
mother, the mysteries of our English language, and little by little
learning the great mystery of godliness. Interest deepened in the two
or three who were thus drawn together. So, Mrs. Lynde's little class
was transferred to our chapel, and soon became a prominent and
hopeful department of our Sunday-school. It was a rare pleasure given
me to receive, in 1870, the first three Chinamen known as admitted to
membership by confession of faith in an English-speaking church in
this land.

For several years I had the opportunity of direct participation in
this new missionary movement, often taking my place as teacher of the
new alphabet and guide to the pronunciation of many unphonetic words.
At first there was novelty about it and it was comparatively easy to
obtain even the numerous teachers which this work requires. But as
the novelty wore off it became more difficult to find and keep
volunteers in sufficient numbers. Besides, a demand arose for more
than the hour of the Sunday-school service. The eagerness to learn
and the increasing acquisition of some called for a more constant and
continuous drill. So has come about the system of schools carried on,
under the American Missionary Association's appropriations and our
California gifts, by the "California Chinese Mission."

I bear glad witness to the large measure of devotion with which this
work has been conducted. It is precisely the kind of work to bring
out the best qualities of Christian character in those who are
responsibly engaged in it. The motives for engaging in it drawn from
any other than the purest Christian fountains are few indeed. The men
and women, who, within my knowledge, have given their time and heart
to it, have long been among my "evidences of Christianity." To the
poor the Gospel has been preached by them. Several of those most
interested during the early years, as superintendents or teachers,
have been laid aside or have "gone home." But there can be no doubt
that the Master has said to them, "Inasmuch as ye did it unto the
least of my disciples, ye have done it unto me."

For this is pre-eminently the work which makes its appeal to the few.
To sustain it pecuniarily as well as otherwise, must pertain to those
who give, hoping for nothing in kind again. Those here who would
give, perhaps, to help Africans on the Congo, cannot always be
appealed to in behalf of this cause. A worthy Christian friend who
has charge of a Sunday-school consulted me about a gift he was
interesting his scholars to make to some missionary. Whom could I
suggest? It was natural, being on this Pacific sea, to suggest a
laborer in northern China. It was amusing to see how quickly he
dropped my suggestion as if it were something very hot. Why, it would
not do at all to mention China in that school. It would kill his
darling missionary proposition completely. This illustrates not by
any means a universal feeling here, but a feeling which is quite too
prevalent. And there are many who would help to teach the Mongolians
if they were to be taught _where they belong_, who would be almost
offended to be asked to help in their education here. So all the more
admirable, in the face of public sentiment here, is it that so many
noble workers and givers have been found to sustain this work. For is
not this, of all others, the enterprise which "takes the gold right
out of the country?"

I overheard an intelligent gentleman, a member of Congress, and born
in my native Massachusetts, express the duly considered opinion that
the Chinese mind is so organized that it cannot be expected to
entertain the Christian ideas. It illustrated the sad fact that it
takes a long time for even Americans to entertain and be molded by
those ideas. This gentleman might easily have found scores of humble
servants and laborers of this "unassimilable" race in his own city
who had come as truly in the power of Him, who is the Truth, as any
of us. For it is the testimony of all who are acquainted with the
facts that as large a proportion of those Chinese who take the
Christian name "adorn the doctrine" as do those who take that name
from among the Caucasian families. Indeed, the proportion may,
perhaps, be larger. For what can ordinarily induce a Chinaman to
espouse the Christian standing here unless it be the genuine
appreciation of Christian truth and the response of his heart to the
love of God as shown in the cross of Christ?

       *       *       *       *       *

BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

MISS D. E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.


Our readers will recall an article issued in this department of the
April "Missionary" entitled "A Plan with Reasons." We are happy to
report that a good many cheering words in approval of the plan have
reached us, and not a few of a practical character. We select from
the latter the following:


FROM NEW YORK.

--I have received a delightful letter from our teacher at the Santee
Agency, and our Committee are much pleased with her account of her
work. I have directed our Treasurer to send to your A. M. A.
Treasurer the first quarterly payment on account of the $150
appropriated, and trust it will reach you in due season. Our payments
will be made hereafter May 1, Aug. 1 and Nov. 1, as we are dependent
on our weekly collections, and hence cannot pay oftener than
quarterly.

--Inclosed find $40 for two shares in support of a missionary
teacher, from whom we may receive a monthly letter.


FROM MASSACHUSETTS.

--Inclosed please find $20. Our Ladies' Benevolent Society wish to
take one share in the expense of a lady missionary teacher, from whom
we shall enjoy letters, hoping in this way to call out more interest
in the work.

--A recent circular from you was read to our ladies by our pastor's
wife, to whom it was sent. We have no separate organization for the
Am. Miss. Assoc. but our ladies contribute something to its
funds--though probably not enough to take a full share in the support
of a teacher. Encouraged by what you say in the circular, we write to
ask that we may be included in the list of those to whom monthly
letters will be sent, as promised to those who take one or more
shares. We are small and few, but the interest is genuine, and we
want to increase it. Our contribution goes into the general fund.


FROM MINNESOTA.

--Last week, on a very stormy day, with less than twenty ladies
present, the subject of taking shares in the support of a missionary
teacher was introduced, and a little over $40 pledged, to be paid
before October. I felt very much encouraged, and shall do all I can
to increase the amount, though I am too much of a stranger--having
been here but a year--to have any idea what we can raise. You
promised us letters from our missionary if we took but one of the $20
shares; so we shall hope to receive them. After another month I hope
to send you word about a much larger pledge.

--Ours is a country church, laboring under the disadvantage of
constant depletion of our younger members; the twin cities of St.
Paul and Minneapolis are close by, and our broad frontier also
attracts strongly. Last year a determined few, by great exertion,
raised almost $100 for division among the Am. Board, A. H. M. S. and
A. M. A. The outlook is not encouraging for this year, and, as a
regular correspondent might add interest to our small meeting, we
voted yesterday to take one share; and should we succeed better than
we hope, our rule of division will give you one-third, whatever the
amount may be. We need more prayer for warm hearts and the open hand.


FROM OHIO.

--We have been reading "A Plan, with the Reasons," and like it much.
We have a class of young girls in our church who ought to be in
missionary work. Can you give us a little fuller account of the work?
and do you have teachers among the poor white women of the South?
Please let us hear soon from you; we want an object to work for. We
may not be able to do very much, but would like to do something.

       *       *       *       *       *

ALABAMA WOMAN'S MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

MISS M. K. LUNT.


The annual meeting of the Alabama Woman's Missionary Association was
held in the prayer-room of the Congregational church in Montgomery,
Monday, March 31. The devotional exercises were conducted by the
President of the Association, Mrs. H. S. De Forest, who gave the
opening address, welcoming the members of the local societies, now
numbering seven.

The reports of the Secretaries and delegates showed an increase of
interest, labor, and funds collected, as well as a constant growth in
missionary intelligence.

Nearly all the societies have remembered the foreign work and the
Indians, in addition to their own needs and people, and have shown a
deep interest in the advancement of Christian education.

Mrs. Ragland, the wife of one of the Talladega theologians, read a
paper upon Home Influence, the prominent points of which were filial
obedience, the important place the wife, mother, and daughter fill in
the home, and the importance of training the daughter in domestic
duties.

Mrs. Ash, whose husband was an acceptable pastor in one of the A. M.
A. churches, and who not long since was called home, read a paper,
giving a comprehensive history of the work of the American Missionary
Association in the South, relating incidents connected with the
earlier teachings, and showing how the work had broadened, and
brought into the ranks the colored people.

Mrs. Andrews, of Talladega, prepared a paper on the "Origin and
History of Our Alabama Movement in Woman's Work," read by Miss
Partridge, giving a full development of the organization and growth
of the society during its seven years' existence, and showing how
much greater results are accomplished by organized effort and unity
of action, and advising that the relation of this society as an
auxiliary to the W. H. M. A. of Boston be severed and become allied
to the Woman's Bureau of New York, which has the Southern field under
its special care; referring also to the interest, courtesy and
sympathy which the Boston society had always shown toward the Alabama
branch.

Mrs. O. F. Curtis, of Emerald Grove, Wis., was present, who has two
sons in the South as missionaries and one on the foreign field--Rev.
W. W. Curtis, of Japan--who addressed the meeting on the condition of
the women and girls in that country; what is being done by the
missionaries to lead them to Christ; also speaking of the hindrances
to the Christian religion.

This interesting meeting could not fail to awaken a deeper interest
in the hearts of all present, and we believe that no one left without
feeling that she had gained a new impulse to renewed consecration and
work for the Master.

       *       *       *       *       *

SUNDAY-SCHOOL WORK AT TOUGALOO.

MISS JOSEPHINE KELLOGG.


The Sunday-school of this Institution has always--under the present
management at least--been considered one of the most important, if
not the most important means of grace and spiritual enlightenment.
The power of sustained attention and consecutive thought is greatly
lacking in all untrained minds; hence the superiority of the
hand-to-hand question-and-answer method of the class-room over the
sermon as a means of informing the mind and clearing away the rubbish
of superstition and the misapprehensions of meaning, derived from the
ignorant preachers who have been in many cases the only previous
expounders of the word, and resulting also from a very vague and
limited understanding of the language of the Bible, the
preacher--even the teacher.

It would be impossible for one new to the work to even _grasp at_ the
distorted images and superstitious misconceptions connected with
religious subjects in the minds of the more ignorant colored people
without the free interchange of personal conversation. So for years
the Sunday-school has been placed at the head of the Sabbath services
here, and given the forenoon, the review by the Superintendent
occupying the time of a short sermon, with the lesson for the day,
already explained and impressed by the several teachers, for its
text. Later in the day class prayer-meetings are held, and here young
Christians learn to take up the cross of bearing testimony for
Christ, and making audible prayer for themselves and others. Many of
the scholars feel these meetings to be very valuable.

At the close of the school year a Sunday-school Convention is held,
and it is urged as a duty upon all Christian students who go out to
teach that they should organize and conduct Sabbath schools in
connection with their day schools.

We have recently received two donations of library books, so that we
now have enough to go once around, and we loan them out each Sunday.
We also generally have papers to distribute, sent us by kind and
careful Sunday-school scholars in the North who make their papers do
double duty. If some school changing song-books would send our school
a hundred or more well-preserved copies of those they lay aside, it
would be a gift highly appreciated.

One of our neighbors is a good Mother in Israel, who has always taken
a warm interest in this institution in all its departments and
appreciated its uplifting influence upon her people. She belongs to
one of the branches of the Methodist Church, and felt that she wanted
something done for the improvement and revival of interest in the
schools of that denomination in the vicinity. Accordingly, she worked
up a S. S. Convention among them last Fall, and invited Mr. Pope and
some others of us to go and help to make it profitable. We could not
get off until after dinner and might as well not have gone at all.
Soon after our entrance a young man introduced a resolution that
superintendents and teachers be _compelled_ to be at their schools at
the hour set for opening. One of the preachers rose and said that
teachers _could not_ be _compelled_, and moved as an amendment that
they be _acquired_ to come promptly.

Then ensued along, windy, wordy controversy on "compelling" and
"acquiring." Seeing no prospect of a conclusion we withdrew. The good
auntie who had invited us followed us out in deep humiliation. I
said, we are sorry to go without contributing something to the
interest of the meeting, but this is such a waste of time, there is
no coming to the point. "That's jus' so, dear," she said, "but that
their ign'rance. Ign'rance _does_ waste time, honey. _Ign'rance can't
come to a pint._" That last sentence struck me as a piece of
epigrammatic wisdom.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHILDREN'S PAGE

       *       *       *       *       *

WONG NING'S IDEAS

AS EXPRESSED BY HIMSELF.


     [Wong Ning is no imaginary character. He is a real
     flesh-and-blood Chinese boy, living in San Francisco, and much
     interested in the new and many sided life going on about him. So
     we are glad to give you, in his own words, a few of his
     observations on American life and manners.]

My name is Wong Ning. I born on home China, come to this country when
thirteen years old, and been here now seven year.

Little boy have very hard time on home China. Have to get up and go
to school at six o'clock--very early that--come home, get breakfast
at eight o'clock, and lunch at twelve o'clock; then stay till six
o'clock in the day. I no think American boy like that!

Little girl no go to school _at all_! Very funny, that! Have one big
house, on home China, where all the girls go every day; learn to sew,
make the pretty things, the flowers, the birds, everything! by the
needle. Little girl no speak to the boy--no! never! on home China.

On home China every one like the mother very much; give everything to
she. If a China boy no like the mother, no work hard for she, no send
she everything--Oh! horrible! _very bad!_ All the sons marry, bring
home the wife to wait on she. Not like the wife so much as the
mother, on home China.

The woman--the wife, the mother, the little girl--all work in the
house--sew, cook, make the cloth, everything! When they make the
dinner or the lunch, set the table very nice, put on everything; then
run behind the curtain (no have any door on home China), and then the
man--the father, the son, the little boy--all come in, sit down, eat
the dinner; eat him all up. Pretty soon, by and by, the woman--the
mother, the wife, the little girl--come quiet, lift up the curtain.
If he all gone, can come eat; if no, can not come. _Yes! Sure!_

I go to school at night, learn to read and write; I think English
very hard. I been work for the Jew family, the Irish family, and the
Spanish family. I think my English get too much funny--so many kinds
of language. Now I work for the American family; like it more better.

I been here so long, and go to school so much, that I understand the
English more better than China. _Very funny that!_ When my cousin, at
the wash-house, send me the letter to come take dinner with he, he
have to write it in English, and the lady I work for, she laugh very
much.

I get one letter this morning. (My American name Charley). Here the
letter:

     "Mr. Chily, you Please come to Kum Lee this evening to take
     dinder, because Lee chong go to home China this week. Ah Do and
     Ah Sing all come in to if soon as you can good by WONG VOO."

I know plenty stories about on home China. You ever hear about Kong
foo-too?--American call him Confucius--he very great man.

Maybe you like, I tell you one story. He live about two, three
thousand year ago, _yes!_ _sure!_ He travel every city, teach
Chinaman--that very good.

One city he no came--that Canton--one very big place inside three big
walls. Kong-foo-too, or Confucius, he come to Canton, and try to come
in the gate--very big gate.

One little boy there seven years old. I think that little boy too
smart. He making play of a little city, and building three little
walls around it, all the same like Canton. He took up too much room,
and talk too smart, so that Confucius cannot get in.

He watch him a little while, then he say, "I guess Canton all right;
this boy can teach Canton. I go some other place." _That very bad!_
Next year that boy died--_very strange that_! So Canton never get any
teaching, not from boy, not from Kong-foo-too. I think not very good
for little boy to be too smart.--_St. Nicholas._

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR APRIL, 1884.

       *       *       *       *       *

MAINE, $257.77.

  Augusta. "J. S." (5 of which _for Indian Work, Hampton
    N. & A. Inst._) to const. REV. ARTHUR F. SKEELE L.M.   $30.00
  Belfast. Miss A. L. McDowell, _for Selma, Ala._            1.00
  Bluehill. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
  Brewer. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          15.00
  Camden. R. Bowers, 20; Abner Howe and wife, 3; Jonas
    Howe, 50c.; Mrs. Myra A. Mansfield, 3.50; E. D.
    Mansfield, 3                                            30.00
   Gorham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         65.85
   Gorham. Sab. Sch., by J. S. Hinckley, _for Student Aid,
     Selma, Ala._                                           26.42
   Limington. "A. B."                                        2.00
   Lyman. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 5.50
   Machias. Center St. Cong. Ch.                             5.00
   Portland. Fourth Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       7.00
   Saint Albans. Rev Wm. S. Sewall                           3.00
   Scarborough. "A friend in Cong. Ch."                     50.00
   South Berwick. Mrs. J. H. Hodgden's S. S. Class, _for
     Student Aid, Talladega C._                             10.00
   South Berwick, Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for
     Wilmington, N. C._
   Woodfords. ----                                           1.00
   Yarmouthville. Rev. A. Loring                             1.00


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $237.16.

   Amherst. Cong. Ch.                                        5.82
   Colebrook. "E. C."                                        2.00
   Hinsdale. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             13.54
   Keene. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Sab. Sch. Work_       15.42
   Lyndeborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          2.50
   Marlborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          15.40
   Mason. Cong. Ch.                                          6.00
   Milford. Willing Workers, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo
     U._                                                    50.00
   New Boston. ---- (30 of which _for Cal. Chinese M._)    100.00
   New Ipswich. A. N. Townsend                               1.00
   Northwood. Dea. J. J. Cate, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._    1.00
   Peterborough. Ladies' Circle Union Cong. C., _for
     Freight_                                                2.04
   Winchester. Cong. Sab. Sch.                              22.44


VERMONT, $716.94.

  Cambridge. Mr. and Mrs. M. Safford                        38.52
  Cambridge. "Friends," by Mrs. S. P. Wheelock, Box of C.,
    _for Tougaloo U._; "Friend" 2, _for Freight_             2.00
  Dorset. Women's H. M. Soc., _for Student Aid, Atlanta
    U._                                                     15.00
  Greensborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         18.50
  Jamaica. Mrs. William Hastings                             5.00
  Manchester. Miss Ellen Hawley 70, _for Student Aid_, 25,
    _for repairing Piano, Talladega C._                     95.00
  Manchester. Rev. and Mrs. A. C. Reed, _for Student Aid,
    Atlanta U._                                             25.00
  Manchester. A. Hemenway                                    5.00
  Milton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          14.40
  Newport. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               13.65
  North Cambridge. "A Friend"                                5.00
  North Ferrisburg. Cyrus W. Wicker                         10.00
  Norwich. John Dutton                                      10.00
  Rutland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              109.48
  Saint Albans. M. A. Stranahan, _for Student Aid, Fisk
    U._                                                     50.00
  Saint Johnsbury. North Cong. Ch., 113.25; South Cong.
    Ch. Sab. Sch., 61.22                                   174.47
  Springfield. Cong. Ch. M. C. Coll., _for Indian M._        8.69
  Stockbridge. Rev. T. S. Hubbard                           10.00
  Townshend. "A Friend"                                      5.00
  West Brattleborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   10.23
  Williston. W. L. Seymour                                   2.00
                                                         --------
                                                          $626.94

  LEGACY.

  Grafton. Estate of Mrs. Caroline B. Akin, by Wm.
    Hastings, Ex.                                           90.00
                                                         --------
                                                          $716.94


MASSACHUSETTS, $6,300.43.

  Adams. Mrs. W. B. Green's Sab. Sch. Class, Cong. Ch.      10.00
  Amherst. First Cong. Ch.                                  25.00
  Amherst. Miss Mary H. Scott, _for Reading Room,
    Tougaloo U._                                             3.00
  Andover. "A Friend," 1.50, _for Student Aid, Talladega
    C._; Free Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Talladega, Ala._, 3
    _for Freight_                                            4.50
  Athol. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const. WM. SHERWOOD
    L.M.                                                    54.39
  Boston. Central Ch. and Soc., 933.81; Old South Ch.
    and Soc., 429.15; Mrs. D. C. Holden, 50c             1,363.46
  Boston. Sab. Sch. of Eliot Ch., 25; Mrs. C. A.
    Spaulding, 20, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._               45.00
  Boston, Charlestown. Winthrop Ch. and Soc.                77.84
  Bradford. Mrs. Sarah C. Boyd, _for Student Aid, Atlanta
    U._                                                     10.00
  Brookfield. Ladies' Benevolent Soc., Cong. Ch., _for
    Freight_                                                 2.35
  Cambridge. First Ch., Shepherd Soc.                      174.50
  Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Ch. Mon. Con. Coll.                14.27
  Cambridgeport. Ladies of Prospect St. Sewing Circle,
    Bbl. of C. and Box of Books, _for Kittrell, N. C._
  Chelsea. Arthur C. Stone and S. S. Class, First Cong.
    Ch., 100; Miss Annie P. James, 30, to const. MISS
    SARAH L. GRANT L.M.; _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._     130.00
  Chelsea. Ladies Union Home M. Band, _for Lady
    Missionary, Chattanooga, Tenn._                         60.00
  Concord. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         29.66
  Dorchester. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    109.94
  East Hampton. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
    Straight U._                                            25.00
  East Hampton. "Friends," _for Oaks, N. C._                 6.00
  East Hampton. First Cong. Ch., _for Freight_               2.40
  East Medway. Bbl. of C. and S. S. Supplies, by S. E.
    Spencer, _for Savannah, Ga._
  Easton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                12.25
  Falmouth. First Cong. Ch. M. C. Coll.                     14.00
  Fall River. Central Cong. Ch.                            250.00
  Florence. Florence Cong. Ch.                              24.50
  Gardner. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         13.96
  Gloucester. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      25.00
  Goshen. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 7.00
  Great Barrington. First Cong. Ch.                        102.38
  Great Barrington. Egbert E. Lee, _for Student Aid,
    Atlanta U._                                              4.00
  Haverhill. A. P. Nichols, 35, _for Student Aid_, 15
    _for Furnishing Room Talladega C._; Ladies of W. H.
    M. Soc., Center Ch., Box of C., _for Talladega C._      50.00
  Haverhill. Sab. Sch. of North Cong. Ch., _for Student
    Aid, Fisk U._                                           25.00
  Haverhill. Sew. Soc. North Cong. Ch., _for Freight_        1.51
  Hubbardston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           50.00
  Hyde Park. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             32.50
  Kingston. "A Friend."                                      1.00
  Lawrence. Lawrence St. Ch., "A friend" Bundle of C.,
    val. 18, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._ and 2 _for
    Freight_                                                 2.00
  Lawrence. Bbl. of C. by Mrs. M. E. J. Bean, _for
    Savannah, Ga._
  Lee. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                      75.00
  Leicester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       72.89
  Lexington. Hancock Ch. and Soc.                           16.00
  Malden. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          61.62
  Marblehead. Hon. J. J. H. Gregory, Bbl. garden seeds
    _for Talladega C._
  Medway. Ladies' Benev. Soc., Bbl. of C., val. 25
  Mill River. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            21.71
  Natick. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                40.00
  Newburyport. Mrs. L. J. Case, _for Student Aid, Fisk
    U._                                                      5.00
  Newton. Eliot Ch. and Soc.                               200.00
  Newton Center. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                  119.03
  Newton Highlands. James L. Hyde, _for Student Aid, Fisk
    U._                                                      3.00
  Newtonville. Mrs. J. W. Hayes                             25.00
  New Salem. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             10.00
  Norfolk. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                3.80
  North Adams. Cong. Ch.                                    32.89
  Northampton. First Cong. Ch., 307.67; Edwards Ch.,
    92.20                                                  399.87
  Northampton. Edwards Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
    Fisk U._                                                25.00
  Northampton. A. L. Williston, 20, _for Student Aid,
    Atlanta U._, and Package Indelible Ink, _for Talladega
    C._                                                     20.00
  Northampton. "A Friend," _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._    17.50
  North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                50.00
  Norton. Mrs. E. B. Wheaton, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._    20.00
  Oakham. Bbl. of C., by S. F. Fairbanks, _for Savannah,
    Ga._
  Orange. Cen. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                      26.00
  Oxford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          20.15
  Peabody. South Ch. and Soc.                              113.00
  Pittsfield. "A Friend"                                     1.00
  Plymouth. Church of the Pilgrimage                        93.86
  Rehoboth. Cong. Ch.                                       21.54
  Roxbury. Dea. Silas Potter, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._    25.00
  Salem. Girl's Missionary Soc., of South Ch., _for
    Freight_                                                 2.05
  Salisbury and Amesbury. Union Evan. Ch.                   15.00
  Somerville. Franklin St. Ch. and Soc.                    176.76
  South Abington. "By a Friend," to const. MRS. SALLY
    SOULE and MRS. MEHITABLE REED L.M's                    100.00
  South Weymouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc. ad'l to
    const. MRS. EMMA J. SMITH and MRS. ALICE H. GARDNER
    L.M's                                                   48.00
  Sunderland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            71.89
  Sunderland. Sab. Sch. Classes of Misses Belle Childs
    and Kittie Armes, 13.49, and of Mrs. Alice Ball,
    Misses Cala A. Delano and Mary L. Hubbard, 14.62;
    _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                           28.11
  Taunton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         31.86
  Townsend. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  6.50
  Ware. East Cong. Ch. and Soc., 372.75 to const. GEORGE
    S. HALL, CHAS. H. ALLEN, JR., ALVAN HYDE, SARAH G.
    HYDE, NELLIE BULLARD and MRS. MARY E. CLEVELAND
    L.M's; First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 31.76                 404.51
  Watertown. Phillips Sew. Circle, Bbl. of C., val. 50.,
    _for Tougaloo U._
  Westborough. Ladies' Freedmen's Sew. Circle. Bbl. of
    C., val. $43.32, _for Talladega C._, 1.50 _for
    Freight_                                                 1.50
  West Brookfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       33.05
  West Gloucester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       10.25
  West Hampton. Cong. Ch.                                   25.00
  West Medway. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            5.00
  Westminster. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     89.15
  West Roxbury. South Evan. Ch. and Soc.                    22.29
  Williamstown. First Cong. Ch.                             13.15
  Wilmington. Ch. of Christ                                 45.63
  Worcester. Piedmont Ch., 320; Union Ch. and Soc.,
    181.60; Central Ch. and Soc., 85                       586.60
  Yarmouth Port. Ladies' Sew. Cir. of First Cong. Ch.
    Bbl. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._, 1 _for Freight_         1.00
  By Charles Marsh, Treas., Hampden Benev. Ass'n: Monson
    Cong. Ch. 20; Cong. Sab. Sch., 10.92, _for Fisk U._,
    and 10.92 _for Hampton N. & A. Inst._; Springfield,
    South Ch., 45.64; First Ch., 24.38; Westfield,
    First Ch., 40                                          151.86
                                                        ---------
                                                        $6,150.43

  LEGACY.

  North Brookfield. Estate of Lydia C. Dodge, by Wm.
    P. Haskell                                             150.00
                                                        ---------
                                                        $6,300.43


RHODE ISLAND, $27.17.

  Little Compton. Cong. Sab. Sch.                           20.00
  Tiverton. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                              7.17


CONNECTICUT, $3,627.82.

  Bozrah. Cong. Ch., 4.63; Miss Hannah Maples, 5             9.63
  Bridgeport. First Cong. Ch.                               81.01
  Canton Center. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          7.37
  Coventry. Second Cong. Ch.                                34.02
  Darien. Cong. Ch.                                         33.00
  East Hampton. Mrs. Laura Skinner, _for Talladega C._       5.00
  East Hartland. Cong. Ch.                                  17.40
  East Haven. Cong. Ch.                                     15.00
  Enfield. Members of Cong. Ch. _for Student Aid, Straight
    U._                                                      5.00
  Farmington. Cong. Ch. (175 of which from Dea. Henry D.
    Hawley to const. ROBT. MCKEE, ALEXANDER PATTERSON
    and HERBERT HART L.M's)                                230.37
  Franklin. Cong. Ch.                                        9.18
  Guilford. Daniel Hand                                    100.00
  Hartford. Roland Mather, 1,000; Windsor Av. Cong. Ch.,
    Mrs. Catherine R. Hillyer, 30, to const. MRS. SUSAN
    M. STOWE L.M.                                        1,030.00
  Hartford. Young Ladies' Mission Band, by Minnie Lewis,
    Box Thread, _for Dakota Home_
  Harwinton. Cong. Ch.                                      51.00
  Meriden. Center Cong. Ch.                                 50.00
  Middletown. First Ch.                                     55.76
  New Britain. Mrs. Norman Hart                             14.00
  New Canaan. John Erhardt                                   2.50
  Mansfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       7.14
  Mansfield Center. First Cong. Ch.                         10.00
  New Haven. First Ch., 200.56; Ch. of the Redeemer, 176;
    Rev. S. W. Barnum, 10 copies "Romanism as It Is," val.
    35; "W. C. S.," 2                                      378.56
  North Manchester. Second Cong. Ch.                        60.00
  Norwich. Park Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         333.77
  Poquonock. Cong. Ch.                                      63.00
  Ridgefield. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Fisk U._                                                10.00
  Seymour. Cong. Ch.                                        15.00
  Sherman. Cong. Ch.                                        20.00
  Southington. "A Friend," _for Fort Berthold, Dak._        50.00
  South Killingly. Cong. Ch.                                 4.00
  South Windsor. First Cong. Ch.                            27.27
  Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      70.29
  Vernon. Rev. Chas. Redfield                                5.00
  Waterbury. Prof. Wm. M. Aber, _for Atlanta U._            10.00
  West Stafford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          9.00
  Whitneyville. Cong. Ch., to const. ELI G. DICKERMAN
    L.M.                                                    35.00
  Windsor Locks. Cong. Ch.                                  77.68
  Windsor Locks. Ladies Soc., Bbl. of C., _for Tougaloo
    U._
   ----. "A Friend"                                         10.00
                                                        ---------
                                                        $2,945.95

  LEGACIES.

  Danbury. Estate of Mrs. R. B. Fry, by L. D.
    Brewster, Adm.                                         481.87
  Eastford. Estate of Royel Warren, by J. D. Barrows,
    Ex.                                                    200.00
                                                        ---------
                                                        $3,627.82


NEW YORK, $1,934.74.

  Brooklyn. Ch. of the Pilgrims                            312.81
  Binghamton. Bbl. of C. and S. S. Supplies, by Mrs.
    A. L. Webster; Mrs. Webster, 5, _for Savannah, Ga._      5.00
  Cohoes. Mrs. H. S. Gilbert, _for Kittrell, N. C._          2.00
  City Island. Miss H. M. Hegeman, _for Freight_             2.00
  Essex Co. ----                                            75.00
  Flushing. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Lady Miss'y_              40.00
  Franklin. Cong. Ch.                                        2.50
  Governeur. "Thank Offering," _for Ken. Mt. Work_           5.00
  Jamesport. Cong. Ch.                                       6.00
  Malone. Mrs. M. K. Wead                                  100.00
  Millville. Cong. Ch.                                       2.10
  Munnsville. T. B. Rockwell                                 3.00
  New York. Broadway Tab. Ch. (65 of which _for Lady
    Missionaries_)                                       1,121.24
  New York. Sewing Sch. of Bethany Mission, Tabernacle
    Ch., by Miss M. S. Janes, _for Santee Agency, Neb._     25.00
  New York. Miss E. E. Wynkoop                               2.00
  Norwich. Mrs. C. B. Martin, _for Library Fund,
    Savannah, Ga._                                           5.00
  Nyack. John W. Towt                                      100.00
  Orient. Hetty M. Wiggins                                    .50
  Owego. Box of C., _for Oaks, N. C._
  Poughkeepsie. Cong. Sab. Sch. Box of Christmas Gifts,
    _for Savannah, Ga._
  Sidney Plains. Cong. Ch.                                   5.00
  Syracuse. Mrs. Clara C. Clarke, 7.40; Nathan Cobb, 5      12.40
  Tarrytown. "A Friend"                                     40.00
  West Salamanca. Rev. Wm. Hall                             12.09
                                                        ---------
                                                        $1,878.64

  LEGACY.

  Fort Covington. Estate of Reuben Martin by John S.
    Parker, Ex.                                             56.10
                                                        ---------
                                                        $1,934.74


NEW JERSEY, $60.00.

  Boundbrook. Cong. Sab. Sch.                               15.00
  East Orange. Grove St. Cong. Ch.                          35.00
  Irvington. Rev. R. S. Underwood                            5.00
  Orange Valley. Cong. Ch., adl.                             5.00


PENNSYLVANIA, $85.00.

  Canton. H. Sheldon                                        10.00
  Coudersport. J. S. and M. W. Mann                          5.00
  East Smithfield. Rev. C. H. Phelps                         5.00
  Hermitage. W. F. Stewart                                   5.00
  Philadelphia. Thomas W. Price                             50.00
  Philadelphia. Frederick S. Kindall, _for Books, Theo.
   Dept. Talladega C._                                      10.00


OHIO, $351.12.

  Akron. Ladies' Home Miss'y Soc. of Cong. Ch (adl)          5.00
  Ashtabula. First Cong. Ch.                                30.00
  Brooklyn. Cong. Ch.                                       12.95
  Chagrin Falls. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Indian M._        4.25
  Chardon. Cong. Ch.                                        12.91
  Cleveland. First Cong. Ch.                                24.38
  Cleveland. Liberty Holden, 10, Dea. Horace Ford, 5, Mrs.
    E. H. Ladd, 1, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._               16.00
  Conneaut. H. E. Pond                                       5.00
  Elyria. Mission Bands Cong. Ch.: "Little Helpers," 15,
    "Opportunity Club," 6, "Golden Links," 4, _for Indian
    Girl, Santee Agency_                                    25.00
  Four Corners. Cong. Ch.                                    2.90
  Hudson. Ladies, by Mrs. A. C. Stevens, _for Furnishing
    Reading Room, Straight U._                               6.00
  Huntsburg. A. E. Millard, 10, Mrs. M. E. Millard, 5       15.00
  Marysville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid, Talladega
    C._                                                     21.88
  Oberlin. First Cong. Ch.                                  35.35
  Paddy's Run. Cong. Ch.                                    22.00
  Sandusky. First Cong. Ch.                                 40.50
  Tallmadge. Rev. Luther Shaw                               10.00
  Warrensville. Mrs. Mary Walkden, _for Chinese M._         10.00
  Youngstown. "Two Friends."                                 2.00
                                                         --------
                                                          $301.12

  LEGACY.

  Cardington. Estate of Wiseman C. Nichols, by Mrs.
    F. C. Nichols, Ex.                                      50.00
                                                         --------
                                                          $351.12


INDIANA, $12.50.

  South Bend. R. Burroughs                                  10.00
  Sparta. John Hawksville                                    2.50


ILLINOIS, $518.68.

  Cambridge. Y. P. Miss'y Soc., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._  25.00
  Chicago. First Cong. Ch., 85.49; Soc. of Inquiry, Theo.
    Sem., 5.15; Millard Av. Cong. Ch., 5                    95.64
  Chicago. Ladies' Miss'y Soc. N. E. Cong. Ch., _for Lady
    Miss'y, Mobile, Ala._                                   15.20
  Chicago. South Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Mobile, Ala._
  Chenoa. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady Miss'y, Mobile,
    Ala._                                                    6.75
  Galesburg. "A Friend."                                    25.00
  Gridley. Bbl. of C. and S. S. Supplies, 3 Packages S. S.
    Work, by Mrs. Geo. Kent, _for Savannah, Ga._
  Homer. Cong. Ch.                                           5.00
  Lisbon. Bbl. of C. and S. S. Supplies, by Mrs. Lewis
    Sherrill, _for Savannah, Ga._
  Oak Park. Young Ladies' Mission Circle, _for Student Aid,
    Fisk U._                                                50.00
  Oak Park. Mr. Packard's S. S. Class, _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                            9.00
  Rantoul. Mrs. Antrace Pierce                              10.00
  Tonica. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._       25.00
  By Mrs. E. F. Williams, _for Lady Missionary, Little
    Rock, Ark._; Chicago, Ladies of South Cong. Ch., 25;
    Moline, Mission Circle of Cong. Ch., 5; Stirling, Cong.
    Ch., 10                                                 40.00
  ----. Bbl. of C., _for Mobile, Ala._
                                                         --------
                                                          $306.59

  LEGACY.

  Galesburg. Estate of Warren C. Willard, by Prof. T. R.
    Willard                                                 25.04
  Pittsfield. Estate of Rev. Wm. Carter, by Wm. C. Carter,
    Ex.                                                    187.05
                                                         --------
                                                          $518.68


MISSOURI, $5,015.00.

  Sedalia. First Cong. Ch.                                  15.00

  LEGACY.

  St. Louis. Estate of S. M. Edgell by Geo. S. Edgell,
    Ex.                                                  5,000.00
                                                       ----------
                                                        $5,015.00


MICHIGAN, $241.46.

  Alamo. Julius Hackley                                     10.00
  Clinton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Fisk U._                                                17.24
  Cooper. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Fisk U._                                                 5.30
  Croton. Cong. Ch.                                          3.60
  Detroit. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                            50.00
  Grand Rapids. Park Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Rev. J. H. H.
    Sengstacke_                                             50.00
  Imlay City. First Cong. Ch. (5.50 of which _for Indian
    M._)                                                    11.00
  Jackson. Mrs. R. M. Bennett                                1.50
  Mount Zion. Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._                     1.00
  Northport. First Cong. Ch.                                 7.56
  Royal Oak. By Rev. Richard Vivian, _for Indian M._         2.00
  Union. First Cong. Ch.                                    53.26
  Vermontville. Cong. Ch. (ad'l)                            29.00


IOWA, $323.47.

  Algona. A. Zahlten                                        10.00
  Bear Grove. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady Miss'y, New
   Orleans, La._, by Mrs. O. C. Warne                        3.10
  Big Rock. Cong. Ch.                                       10.00
  Charles City. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    33.00
  Creston. Cong. Ch., _for Lady Miss'y, New Orleans, La._    7.02
  Des Moines. Ladies of Plym. Cong. Ch., 12.50; "Three
    Gentlemen," 8; Mrs. A. A., 1; Mrs. M., 1, _for
    Talladega C._                                           22.50
  Genoa Bluff. H. A. Morse, _for Student Aid, Talladega
    C._                                                     10.00
  Grinnell. Cong. Ch., 13.06, and Sab. Sch., 23.17          36.23
  Grinnell. Mrs. W. B. Chamberlain, _for Student Aid,
    Straight U._                                            20.00
  McGregor. Cong. Ch.                                       24.26
  McGregor. Ladies' Miss'y Soc. Cong. Ch.                    9.91
  Ottumwa. "Friends," _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._         2.50
  Tipton. Mrs. J. M. L. Daniels, 1; Mrs. M. D. C., 50c.;
    S. P. D., 50c.                                           2.00
  Wilton. Ladies' Miss'y Soc. of Cong. Ch.                   3.00
  By Mrs. J. H. Ellsworth, _for Lady Missionary, New
    Orleans, La._; Corning, Ladies' Miss'y Soc., 4; Cresco,
    Ladies, 4.25; Decorah, Ladies of Cong. Ch., 25; Monona,
    Ladies of Cong. Ch., 1, Mrs. W. S. Potwin, 2; Postville,
    Ladies, 1; Tabor, Ladies' H. M. Soc., 15                52.25
  By Mrs. M. G. Phillips, _for Lady Missionary, New
    Orleans, La._; Algona Ladies, 1.50; Grinnell, Ladies,
    76.20                                                   77.70


WISCONSIN, $203.50.

  Beloit. Eclipse Wind Engine Co., Feed Mill, _for Tougaloo
    U._
  Eau Claire. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Lady Miss'y, Austin,
    Tex._                                                   15.00
  Kaukauna. Cong. Ch.                                        6.50
  Lake Geneva. Y. P. Benev. Soc., _for Student Aid, Fisk
    U._                                                     35.00
  Madison. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady Miss'y, Austin,
    Texas_                                                  30.00
  Racine. Hon. W. B. Erskine, _for Furnishing Parlor,
    Stone Hall, Straight U._                               100.00
  Ripon. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady Miss'y, Austin,
    Texas_                                                  16.00
  Stoughton. Mrs. E. B. Sewall                               1.00


MINNESOTA, $207.01.

  Alexandria. First Cong. Ch.                               10.00
  Freeborn. Cong. Ch.                                        2.03
  Minneapolis. Plymouth Cong. Ch. (8.25 of which from
    Dea. Cunningham), 34.01; First Cong. Ch., 10.04; Vine
    Cong. Ch., 7.80                                         51.85
  Minneapolis. By Jay Thompson, _for Selma, Ala._            5.00
  Rochester. G. H. Swazey                                    4.97
  Rushford. Cong. Ch. (5 of which _for Indian M._)           7.00
  Winona. Cong. Ch.                                        126.16


KANSAS, $15.50.

  Manhattan. William Castle, 5; Miss Mary Castle, 5         10.00
  Topeka. Tuition                                            4.50
  Wabaunsee. First Ch. of Christ                             1.00


NEBRASKA, $27.30.

  Ashland. Cong. Ch.                                         6.75
  Buda Flat. Cong. Ch.                                       4.00
  Crete. Melinda Bowen                                       5.00
  Lincoln. "K. & C."                                         5.00
  Maineland. Cong. Ch.                                       1.80
  Olive Branch. Cong. Ch.                                    4.75


ARKANSAS, $19.00.

  Little Rock. Tuition                                      19.00


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $196.00.

  Washington. First Cong. Ch.                              181.00
  Washington. Lincoln Memorial Ch., 6.67, and Sab. Sch.,
    2.33; Woman's Aid and Mission Soc., 6                   15.00


KENTUCKY, $149.25.

  Lexington. Tuition                                        86.50
  Williamsburg. Tuition                                     62.75


TENNESSEE, $598.55.

  Chattanooga. First Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                 5.00
  Grassy Cove. Rev. J. Silsby                                4.50
  Jonesborough. Tuition                                     22.30
  Knoxville. Second Cong. Ch.                               12.00
  Memphis. Le Moyne Sch., Tuition                          258.90
  Nashville. Fisk U., Tuition                              295.85


NORTH CAROLINA, $365.60.

  Hillsborough. Tuition                                     11.50
  Kittrell. "Friends," by P. M. Lee                          2.25
  Wilmington. Tuition, 243.85; Cong. Ch., 8                251.85


SOUTH CAROLINA, $1,282.65.

  Charleston. Tuition, $1,267.65; Cong. Ch., 15          1,282.65


GEORGIA, $660.45.

  Atlanta. Storrs Sch., Tuition, 230; Rent, 3; First
    Cong. Ch., 30                                          263.00
  Macon. Lewis High Sch., Tuition, 164.15; Rent, 2.50;
    Cong. Ch., 12                                          178.65
  McIntosh. Tuition                                         24.00
  Savannah. Tuition, 162.80; Cong. Ch., 30                 192.80
  Way Cross. H. P. Stewart, _for Atlanta U._                 2.00


ALABAMA, $379.80.

  Athens. Tuition                                           58.50
  Mobile. Tuition                                          188.55
  Montgomery. Cong. Ch.                                     10.00
  Selma. Cong. Ch.                                           4.40
  Talladega. Talladega C., Tuition, 108.35; Cong. Ch., 10  118.35


MISSISSIPPI, $901.58.

  Edwards. Mrs. Fanny Robinson, _for Tougaloo U._            1.00
  Hazlehurst. Mr. Cunningham, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo
    U._                                                      3.00
  Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., 841.40; Rent, 37.50; Cong. Ch.,
    18.68                                                  897.58


LOUISIANA, $287.00.

  New Orleans. Straight U., Tuition                        262.00
  New Orleans. Prof. W. J. McMurtry, _for Student Aid,
    Straight U._                                            25.00


TEXAS, $286.97.

  Austin. Tillotson C. & N. Inst.                          285.47
  Austin. Live Oak Sab. Sch., _for Bibles_                   1.50


INCOMES, $18.36.

  Avery Estate, _for Mendi M._                               7.44
  Theological Endowment Fund, _for Howard U._               10.92
                                                     ------------

    Total for April                                    $25,207.78

    Total from Oct. 1 to April 30                     $136,652.79
                                                     ============


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

   Subscriptions for April                                  44.23
   Previously acknowledged                                 540.12
                                                         --------
      Total                                               $584.35


FOR ENDOWMENT FUND.

  Providence, R. I. James Coats, 1,000; John E. Troup,
    125; John McAuslan, 125; Miss Caroline Richmond, 50;
    _for Stone Theo. Fund, Howard U._                       1,300
  Providence, R. I. Estate of A. D. Lockwood, _for Stone
    Theo. Fund, Howard U._                                    250
                                                         --------
    Total                                                  $1,550


  H. W. HUBBARD, TREAS.,
  56 Reade St., N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

SKIN HUMORS

CAN BE CURED BY

GLENN'S SULPHUR SOAP.


SAN FRANCISCO, Feb. 16, 1883.

_Mr. C. N. Crittenton_:

DEAR SIR: I wish to call your attention to the good your Sulphur Soap
has done me. For nearly fourteen years I have been troubled with a
skin humor resembling salt rheum. I have spent nearly a small fortune
for doctors and medicine, but with only temporary relief. I commenced
using your "Glenn's Sulphur Soap" nearly two years ago--used it in
baths and as a toilet soap daily. My skin is now as clear as an
infant's, and no one would be able to tell that I ever had a skin
complaint. I would not be without the soap if it cost five times the
amount.

  Yours respectfully,

  M. H. MORRIS.
  LICK HOUSE, San Francisco, Cal.


The above testimonial is indisputable evidence that Glenn's Sulphur
Soap will eliminate poisonous Skin Diseases WHEN ALL OTHER MEANS HAVE
FAILED. To this fact thousands have testified; and that it will
banish lesser afflictions, such as common PIMPLES, ERUPTIONS and
SORES, and keep the skin clear and beautiful, is absolutely certain.
For this reason ladies whose complexions have been improved by the
use of this soap NOW MAKE IT A CONSTANT TOILET APPENDAGE. The genuine
always bears the name of C. N. CRITTENTON, 115 Fulton street, New
York, sole proprietor. For sale by all druggists or mailed to any
address on receipt of 30 cents in stamps, or three cakes for 75
cents.

       *       *       *       *       *

BRADFORD ACADEMY,

  AN INSTITUTION FOR THE HIGHER EDUCATION OF YOUNG WOMEN.
  BRADFORD, MASS.
  INCORPORATED 1804.

[Illustration]


CALENDAR

The year 1883-84 closes with public anniversary, June 18, 1884.

THE YEAR 1884-85.

  FIRST TERM opens     TUESDAY, Sept. 2, 1884.
  FIRST TERM closes    WEDNESDAY, Nov. 26, 1884.
  SECOND TERM opens    TUESDAY, Dec. 2, 1884.

  Recess at Christmas time.

  SECOND TERM closes   FRIDAY, Feb. 27, 1885.
  THIRD TERM opens     TUESDAY, March 17, 1885.
  THIRD TERM closes    WEDNESDAY, June 17, 1885.

The academic year closes on the last Wednesday but one in June, and
consists of three terms.

The year 1884-85 will commence on the first Tuesday in September.


[Illustration: PARLOR OF A SUITE.]


EXPENSES.

  BOARD, including washing, fuel and lights,
      FIRST TERM                                      $80.00
  BOARD, including washing, fuel and lights,
      SECOND TERM                                      90.00
  BOARD, including washing, fuel and lights,
      THIRD TERM                                       90.00
  TUITION, including English branches,
    Latin and French, Greek or German,
    and Vocal Music in Classes ($20 per
    term), for the year                                60.00
                                                     -------
      Total expenses for the year                    $320.00

Special terms to daughters of Clergymen and Missionaries.

       *       *       *       *       *

No extras except the following:

TUITION IN MUSIC AND ART:

  Instruction on Piano, per term                  $20 to $40

  Use of Piano one hour a day, per term                 3.00

  Instruction in Art, including Linear
    and Perspective Drawing and Painting,
    according to the ability of the pupil,
    per term                                           16.00


Application may be made to Miss ANNIE E. JOHNSON, Principal. In case
of failure after an engagement been made, information should be given
immediately.

Inquiries in regard to expenses may be made of

  J. D. KINGSBURY,
  Treasurer,
  BRADFORD, MASS.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The American Missionary -- Volume 38,
No. 06, June, 1884, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AMERICAN MISSIONARY--JUNE, 1884 ***

***** This file should be named 29556.txt or 29556.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/5/5/29556/

Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, KarenD, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Cornell University Digital Collections.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
