The Project Gutenberg EBook of Rim o' the World, by B. M. Bower

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Rim o' the World

Author: B. M. Bower

Illustrator: Anton Otto Fischer

Release Date: August 3, 2009 [EBook #29580]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RIM O' THE WORLD ***




Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Illustration: "Put up your hands a little higher, Mr. Man!"]




RIM O' THE WORLD

BY

B. M. BOWER

AUTHOR OF

CHIP OF THE FLYING U, THE THUNDER BIRD, SKYRIDER, ETC.

FRONTISPIECE BY

ANTON OTTO FISCHER

GROSSET & DUNLAP

PUBLISHERS NEW YORK

Made in the United States of America




Copyright, 1919,

By Little, Brown, and Company.

All rights reserved




CONTENTS

      I THE RIM AND WHAT LAY BENEATH IT                              1
     II THE LORRIGAN TREE GROWS THRIFTILY                           16
    III MARY HOPE DOUGLAS APPEARS                                   30
     IV A MATTER OF BRANDS                                          44
      V THEY RIDE AND THEY DO NOT TELL WHERE                        57
     VI BELLE MEETS AN EMERGENCY IN HER OWN WAY                     67
    VII THE NAME                                                    82
   VIII THE GAME                                                    90
     IX A LITTLE SCOTCH                                            102
      X THE LORRIGAN WAY                                           118
     XI LANCE RIDES AHEAD                                          133
    XII SHE WILL, AND SHE WON'T                                    145
   XIII A WAY HE HAD WITH HIM                                      156
    XIV IN WHICH LANCE FINISHES ONE JOB                            172
     XV HE TACKLES ANOTHER                                         180
    XVI ABOUT A PIANO                                              192
   XVII THE LORRIGAN VIEWPOINT                                     204
  XVIII PEDDLED RUMORS                                             219
    XIX MARY HOPE HAS MUCH TROUBLE                                 232
     XX AS HE LIVED, SO HE DIED                                    250
    XXI LANCE TRAILS A MYSTERY                                     258
   XXII LANCE RIDES ANOTHER TRAIL                                  272
  XXIII LANCE PLAYS THE GAME                                       283
   XXIV WHEN A LORRIGAN LOVES                                      297
    XXV BELLE LORRIGAN WINS                                        312
    XVI THE DOPE                                                   323
  XXVII HOW ONE TRAIL ENDED                                        336
 XXVIII THE MAKING OF NEW TRAILS                                   345




RIM O' THE WORLD




CHAPTER ONE

THE RIM AND WHAT LAY BENEATH IT


Not all of the West is tamed and trained to run smoothly on pneumatic
tires and to talk more enthusiastically of the different "makes" of
cars than of bits and saddles. There are still wide stretches unknown
of tourists and movie men hunting locations for Western melodrama
where men live in the full flavor of adventure and romance and never
know it, because they have never known any other way to live.

In the Black Rim country there is such a place,--a wide, rough,
sage-grown expanse where cattle and horses and sheep scarce know the
look of barbed wire, and where brands are still the sole mark of
ownership. Set down between high mountain ranges, remote, sufficient
unto itself, rudely prosperous, the Black Rim country has yet to be
tamed.

Black Rim country is called bad. The men from Black Rim are eyed
askance when they burr their spur rowels down the plank sidewalks of
whatever little town they may choose to visit. A town dweller will not
quarrel with one of them. He will treat him politely, straightway seek
some acquaintance whom he wishes to impress, and jerk a thumb toward
the departing Black Rim man, and say importantly: "See that feller I
was talking with just now? That's one of them boys from the Black Rim.
Man, he'd kill yuh quick as look at yuh! He's bad. Yep. You want to
walk 'way round them birds from the Rim country. They're a hard-boiled
bunch up that way." And he would be as nearly correct in his estimate
as such men usually are.

Tom Lorrigan's father used to carry a rifle across his thighs when he
rode up the trail past Devil's Tooth Ridge to the benchland beyond,
where his cattle fed on the sweet bunch grass. He never would sit
close to a camp-fire at night save when his back was against a huge
boulder and he could keep the glare of the fire from his eyes. Indians
he killed as he killed rattlers, on the range theory that if they did
not get him then they might some other time, and that every dead
Indian counted one less to beware of. Tom Lorrigan's father was called
a bad man even in Black Rim country,--which meant a good deal.
Hard-bitted men of the Black Rim chose their words wisely when they
spoke to Tom's father; chose wisely their words when they spoke of
him, unless they had full faith in the listener's loyalty and
discretion.

Tom Lorrigan's father lived to be sixty,--chiefly because he was
"quick on the draw" and because he never missed anything that he shot
at. But at sixty, when he was still hated by many, loved by a very few
and feared by every one, he died,--crushed under his horse when it
fell on the Devil's Tooth trail one sleety day in midwinter.

Young Tom Lorrigan learned to shoot when he learned to ride, and he
was riding pitching horses before he could be certain which was p and
which was q in his dad's old spelling book. Which does not by any
means prove that young Tom was an ignoramus. Tom once had three
brothers, but these were somehow unlucky and one by one they dropped
out of the game of life. The oldest brother died with the smell of
burnt black powder in his nostrils, and Tom's father stood over the
body and called his dead son a fool for wearing his gun so it could
stick in the holster. "If I ever ketch yuh doin' a trick like that,
I'll thrash yuh till yuh can't stand," he admonished young Tom
sternly. Young Tom always remembered how his dad had looked when
brother Bill was shot.

The second brother was overtaken while riding a big sorrel horse that
did not happen to carry the Lorrigan brand. So he too died with the
smell of powder smoke in his nostrils, taking three of his pursuers
with him into the Dark Land. Him Tom's father cursed for being
caught.

So young Tom learned early two lessons of the Black Rim book of
wisdom: His gun must never stick in the holster; he must never get
caught by the law.

He was twenty when Brother Jim was drowned while trying to swim his
horse across the Snake in flood time on a dare. Young Tom raced along
the bank, frantically trying to cast his forty-foot rope across sixty
feet of rushing current that rolled Jim and his horse along to the
boil of rapids below. Young Tom was a long, long while forgetting the
terror in Jim's eyes, the helplessness of Jim's gloved hand which he
threw up to catch at the rope that never came within twenty feet of
him, and at the last, the hopeless good-by wave he sent Tom when he
whirled into the moil that pulled him under and never let him go. Tom
learned on the bank of the Snake another lesson: He must never be so
weak as to let another man badger him into doing something against his
own desires or judgment.

Jim's pitiful going left Tom in full possession of the Devil's Tooth
ranch and the cattle and horses that fed on the open range of the
Black Rim country,--and they were many. Young Tom was lonely, but his
loneliness was smothered under a consuming desire to add to his
possessions and to avoid the mistakes of his brothers and of his
father who had carelessly ridden where he should have walked.

Men of the Rim country frequently predicted that young Tom Lorrigan
would die with his boots on; preferably in mid-air. They said he was
going to be like his dad in more than looks, and that times were
changing and a man couldn't steal cattle and kill off anybody that
argued with him, and get away with it as Tom's father had done. They
complained that the country was getting too damn Sunday school, and
young Tom had better tame down a little before he got into trouble.

As Black Rim defines the word, Tom was quite as bad as they called
him. A handsome young dare-devil he was, slanting his glance
downward when he looked into the eyes of a six-foot man,--and
every inch of him good healthy bone and muscle. Women eyed him
pleasantly, wistful for his smile. Men spoke to him friendlywise
and consciously side-stepped his wrath. On the Black Rim range his
word was law, his law was made for himself and the wealth he hankered
for. That wealth he named a million dollars, and he named it often
because he liked the sound of the word. Without any ifs he declared
it. There was a million to be had in Idaho, was there not? Very well,
he would have his million, and he would have it in cattle and horses
and land. He would not go mucking in the gold mines for it; his
million should graze on the bunch grass. He wanted, he said, to see a
million dollars walking around. And since old Tom Lorrigan had
left him a mere forty thousand--according to the appraisers of the
Devil's Tooth estate--young Tom had a long way to go to see his dream
a reality.

Men of the Black Rim hinted that young Tom rode with a long rope;
meaning that his rope would reach the cattle of his neighbor cowmen if
they came in his way. But they only hinted, for unless they could
prove beyond the doubt of any twelve men in the county that his brand
was burned on any cattle save his own, they had no wish to offend. For
young Tom had learned well his three lessons from the fate of his
three brothers; his gun never stuck in its holster; he was wily and
not to be caught; he could neither be harried nor coaxed into setting
aside his own judgment while it seemed to him good.

You would think that young Tom would speedily find himself a mate
amongst the girls of the Black Rim country,--though they were as
scarce as princesses of the royal blood and choice was of necessity
restricted to a half-dozen or so. None of the girls he knew pleased
his fancy, untrained though that fancy might be. Instinct told him
that they were too tame, too commonplace to hold his interest for
long. A breathless dance or two, a kiss stolen in a shadowy corner,
and blushes and giggles and inane remonstrances that bored him
because he knew they would come. Tom had reached the sere age of
twenty-two when he began to wonder if he must go beyond the Black Rim
world for his wife, or resign himself to the fate of an old bachelor.
None of the Black Rim girls, he told himself grimly, should ever have
a share in that million.

Then that purple-lidded, putty-face jade we call Fate whimsically sent
him a mate; curious, I suppose, to see what would happen when the two
whose trails had lain so far apart should meet.

A girl from some far city she was; a small star that had twinkled
behind the footlights and had fled--or had fallen--to the Black Rim
country. Like many another, she had gone as far as her money would
take her. That it took her to the end of the little branch railroad
that stopped abruptly with its nose against a mountain twenty miles
from the Devil's Tooth ranch was a coincidence,--or the whim of Fate.
There she was, as strange to the outland as young Tom would have been
to the city whence she had come; thinking perhaps to start life afresh
in some little Western town; with no money to carry her back to the
outskirts of civilization, and no town wherein she might win fresh
successes. The train that had brought her panted upon a siding,
deserted, its boiler cooling, its engineer, fireman, conductor and
brakeman leaning over a bar in the shack that called itself a saloon.
To-morrow it would rattle back to the junction, if all went well and
the rails held fast to the ties, which was not certain.

The station's name was Jumpoff. The train's conductor, who had the
misfortune to be considered a humorist, liked to say that Jumpoff was
a knot at the end of the road to keep the track from unraveling. He
had told the girl that, on the long, jolty ride from the junction. The
girl replied that at any rate she liked the name.

What really held Jumpoff on the time-table in those days before it
became a real town were the stockyards, where the Black Rim cattle
came to start their journey to market. The trail over the mountains to
the main line was rough, with a two-day drive without water. Yet the
Black Rim country had many cattle, and a matter of a few tunnels and a
trestle or two let the railroad in by a short cut which minimized the
distance to the main line. The branch line paid a fair interest on the
investment,--but not with its passenger service.

The girl found herself stranded in a settlement whose business was
represented by one saloon, one section house, one stable, one
twelve-by-twelve depot and a store that was no more than an addition
to the saloon, with the bartender officiating in both places as
customers required his services. Times when cattle were being shipped,
the store was closed and the saloon had no rival.

It was while the girl was hesitating half-way between the store-saloon
and the section house, wondering which she would choose, that young
Tom Lorrigan galloped up to the hitch rail, stopped his horse in two
stiff-legged jumps, swung down and came toward her. Like a picture on
a wall calendar she looked to young Tom, who had never seen her like
in flesh and blood. He lifted his big, range hat, and she smiled at
him,--though it must have been a stage smile, she had so little heart
for smiling then.

Tom blinked as though he had looked at the sun. Such a smile he had
never seen in his life; nor such hair, like real, gold-colored silk
all in curls around her face; nor such eyes, which were blue as the
sky at twilight when the stars first begin to show.

"Jumpoff is not much of a town," said the girl and laughed to hide how
close she was to tears.

Young Tom caught his breath. He had thought that women had only two
forms of laughter, the giggle of youth or the cackle of age. He had
never dreamed that a woman could laugh like a mountain stream gurgling
down over the rocks. Immediately he visioned young ferns dripping
diamonds into a shadowed pool, though he did not attempt to formulate
the vision in words. His answer was obvious and had nothing to do with
gurgling brooks, or with ferns and shadowed pools.

"It sure ain't, Miss. Might you be looking for somebody in particular?"

"No-o--I'm just here. It would be a poor place to look for anybody,
wouldn't it?"

"Sure would." Young Tom found his courage and smiled, and the girl
looked at him again, as though she liked that white-toothed smile of
Tom's.

"Well, I started out to find the jumping-off place, and this sounded
like it on the railroad map. I guess it's It, all right; there's
nothing to do but jump."

Young Tom pulled his black eyebrows together, studying her. By her
speech she was human; therefore, in spite of her beauty that dazzled
him, she was not to be feared.

"You mean you ain't got any particular place to go from here?"

The girl tilted her head and stared up the mountain's steep,
pine-covered slope. She swung her head a little and looked at Tom. She
smiled bravely still, but he thought her eyes looked sorry for
something.

"Is there any particular place to go from here?" she asked him
wistfully, keeping the smile on her lips as the world had taught her
to do.

"Not unless you went back."

She shook her head. "No," she said, firmly, "I'll climb that mountain
and jump off the top before I'll go back."

Young Tom felt that she spoke in sober earnest in spite of her smile;
which was strange. He had seen men smile in deadly earnest,--his dad
had smiled when he reached for his gun to kill Buck Sanderson. But
women cried.

"Don't you know anybody at all, around here?"

"Not a soul--except you, and I don't know whether your name is Tom or
Bill."

"My name's Tom--Tom Lorrigan. Say! If you ain't got any place to
go--why--I've got a ranch and about twenty-five hundred head of cattle
and some horses. If you didn't mind marrying me, I could take you out
there and give yuh a home. I'd be plumb good to you, if you're willing
to take a chance."

The girl stood back and looked him over. Tall as Tom was she came
almost to his chin. He saw her eyes darken like the sky at dusk, and
it seemed to him quite possible that stars could shine in them.

"You'd be taking as great a chance as I would. I haven't any ranch or
any cattle, or anything at all but myself and two trunks full of
clothes and some things in my life I want to forget. And I have
sixty cents in my purse. I can't cook anything except to toast
marshmallows--"

"I've got a cook," put in young Tom quickly.

"And the clothes I've got would be a joke out here. And the things I
came out here to forget I shall never tell you--"

"I ain't interested enough to ask, or to listen if you told me," said
Tom.

"And myself can sing to you and dance to you, and I'm twenty years old
by the family Bible--"

"I'm twenty-two--makes it about right," said Tom.

"And if you should count fifty and ask me again--"

"Ten, twenty, thirty, forty-fifty, will you marry me?" obeyed Tom with
much alacrity.

"You might call me Belle. Belle Delavan. Well, I came to Jumpoff
because--I meant to jump. Yes, I'll marry you--and the Lord have mercy
on you, Tom Lorrigan, if I live to regret it."

"Amen. Same to you," grinned Tom. "It's an even break, anyway. They
don't claim I'm sprouting wings. They say I've got split hoofs in my
boots instead of feet, and wear my ears pointed at the top. But--but
no girl has got any loop on me. I've been straight, as far as women
goes. That's my record up to the present. If you can stand for a
little drinkin' and gamblin' and shootin'--"

Belle waved aside his self-depreciation. Young Tom was a handsome
devil, and his eyes were keen and clear and looked right into her own,
which was sufficient evidence of good faith for any woman with warm
blood in her body.

"Tom Lorrigan, I've eaten just three soda crackers, six marshmallows
and one orange since yesterday noon," said she irrelevantly. "I can't
be emotional when I'm half starved. Is there any place where I can get
a piece of bread or something?"

"My Lord! Think of me standing here and not thinkin' whether you'd had
dinner or not! Sure, you can have something to eat."

He took her by the arm, too penitent to be diffident over the
unaccustomed gallantry, and hustled her toward the section house. His
mind registered the fact that the bartender, the fireman, the brakeman
and the conductor would shortly apologize abjectly for standing
outside the saloon gawping at a lady, or they would need the immediate
ministrations of a doctor. He hoped the girl had not noticed them.

"They'll throw some grub together quick, over here," he explained to
the girl. "Everybody eats at the section house. It ain't much of a
place, but there ain't any other place. And while you're having dinner
I'll have the operator wire down to Lava for a marriage license to be
sent up on the next train. The saloon man is a justice of the peace,
and he'll marry us right away, soon as you eat. And--"

"Without a license? I know it's always done that way on the stage,
but--but this isn't going to be any stage marriage."

"Well, but the license will be all made out and on the way, and he'll
take my word for it and go ahead with the ceremony. If I tell him to,
he will. It will be all right; I'll _make_ it all right. And then I
can get a team from a ranch back here a ways, and take you right out
to Devil's Tooth. It's the best way. This ain't any place for a lady
to stay. You'll be comfortable out at the Devil's Tooth--it's clean,
anyway." He looked at her honest-eyed, and smiled again. "Yuh needn't
be afraid uh me. We're rough enough and tough enough, and we maybe
shoot up each other now and again, but we ain't like city folks; we
don't double-cross women. Not ever."

She said nothing, and when they had walked four steps farther he added
with a sincere wish to set her at ease: "I could take you to some
ranch and leave you till the license comes, if you think it wouldn't
be all right to get married now. But the womenfolks would talk your
arm off, and you wouldn't like it. And they'd talk about you when your
back was turned. But if Scotty goes ahead and married us, I don't see
why--"

"Oh, I'm not worrying about that. It's just cutting a corner instead
of walking around. I was thinking," said Belle Delavan, while she
dabbed at her lashes as though they were beaded with paint instead of
tears and she must be careful not to smear them, "I was just thinking
how--how _good_ you are. My God, I never knew they grew men like you,
outside of plays and poetry."

"Good!" echoed young Tom Lorrigan, feared of his kind for his badness.
His tone was hushed with amazement, all aglow with pleasure.
"_Good!_--my Lord!"




CHAPTER TWO

THE LORRIGAN TREE GROWS THRIFTILY


Young Tom Lorrigan had found his mate. Had he known more about life in
the big world beyond the Rim, he must have been amazed at his luck.
Once a man dropped dead in a poker game when he had staked his last
blue chip and drawn a royal flush. In the great game of hearts Tom had
drawn a royal flush, but he did not drop dead. Instead, he went right
on living, more determined than ever to own a million dollars' worth
of cattle and horses before he died, considerably before he died,
because he wanted to enjoy that million with Belle. And because of her
he wanted that million to be honest money.

Everything he did now, he did for Belle more than for himself. As a
matter of course she became his real reason for living. She was like
the sun. He took her for granted, never questioning the blessed warmth
of her presence, never stopping to wonder what life would be like if
he lost her. She was beautiful, with a beauty that never palled and
never paled. She laughed a great deal, and he never could keep
laughter from his own lips while he listened. When she sang she put
the meadow larks to shame, and afterwards when he rode the range alone
Tom would whistle strange, new melodies that the Black Rim country
never had heard before,--melodies which Belle had taught him
unconsciously with her singing. He did not know that it would have
astonished a city dweller to hear the bad man of Black Rim Country
whistling Schubert's "Serenade" while he rode after cattle, or
Wagner's "Prize Song," or "Creole Sue," perhaps, since Belle, with
absolute impartiality, sang everything that she had ever heard sung.
On billboards before eastern theatres Belle Delavan had been called
"The Girl with a Thousand Songs." Audiences had been invited by the
stage manager to name any selection they might choose, assured that
Belle would sing it from memory. No wonder that her singing never grew
stale to Tom Lorrigan!

But mostly she busied herself with little domesticities that somehow
never included cooking, and with driving helter-skelter over the range
with two horses hitched to a buckboard, following Tom when he rode
after cattle. Do you think she should logically have learned to ride?
She did try it once on the gentlest horse that Tom owned, which was
not too gentle to run away with Belle. She rode that horse just two
hundred yards before she jolted so far from the saddle that she could
not find it again until some time after, when they had caught the
horse and led him to the corral.

"Not any more for me, Tom Lorrigan!" she gasped, flapping her two
pretty hands in eloquent disgust when Tom rode up to her. "I wouldn't
get on a horse's back again to star for the Queen of England! I'll
take that team of he-devils you've been breaking to drive, and I'll
drive 'em or break every bone in their bodies. I'm willing to get
behind any horse you've got; but to get on their backs--excuse me!"
She limped painfully to the house with her yellow hair blowing around
her shoulders and across her lips that would smile in spite of her
mishap.

After that Belle drove the "he-devils" and others quite as devilish,
and risked her bones with perfect equanimity. She drove horses that
had to be thrown before the collar could be buckled on, and
"forefooted" before they would submit to the harness. Indeed, Belle
seemed to prefer that kind of horses. She wanted a team that could
keep pace with Tom,--and she had it. Her buckboard lasted a year,
with luck. She strewed the Devil's Tooth range with wheels and
doubletrees and splinters and hairpins, and scattered sunshiny
smiles and cuss-words and snatches of song wherever she went. And
since she went wherever eight bronco feet could take her, Black
Rim country came to know Belle Lorrigan as it knew Tom. Came to fear
Belle Lorrigan's wrath, which bettered the lightning for searing,
lashing sword-thrusts of venom; came to know her songs well enough
to hum snatches of them; came to laugh when she laughed,--and to
hope that the next laugh would not be aimed at them; came to
recognize her as a better shot than any one save Tom, who taught her.

At the country dances on the various ranches, Belle never missed
quadrille, two-step, waltz or schottische, and she danced by herself
or sang songs during the intervals, while the women of the range sat
stiffly along the walls on benches, stared at Belle and whispered
behind their weather-reddened hands, and tittered. She taught
big-jointed, bashful boys how to waltz, and she slapped a half-drunken
miner who squeezed her too tightly in a square dance. Slapped Tom also
when he came hurrying up to kill the miner, and told him to keep to
his own quarrels and save his powder for something worth while. She
didn't need help to step on a worm, she added, and took a youth by the
arm and led him off to dance. The miner, I may say to the curious, was
next seen in Hailey, heading south. He left a very good prospect up in
the hills and never went back to work out his assessments.

As you have probably guessed, Belle Lorrigan and the women of the
Black Rim country did not get on very well together. Black Rim women
thought that a woman who wore her hair in curls down her back--yellow
hair at that!--could not be any too good if the truth were known. They
declared to one another that a woman who did not talk about her past
life, who never so much as mentioned past illnesses, even, must have a
great deal to cover up. How did Tom Lorrigan get acquainted with her,
anyway? Through some marriage agency, they were willing to bet. And
how did a decent woman happen to have all the fancy clothes which
Belle Lorrigan possessed? And jewelry enough to stock a store with!
Three rings on one finger at one time and the same time was going it
pretty strong, in the opinion of the Black Rim ladies. They also
believed that she used paint and powder, which damned her beyond all
hope of redemption.

Poor Belle Lorrigan (Black Rim country spoke of her always as Belle
Lorrigan without in the least understanding why she remained an
individual personality to them instead of becoming merely Mrs.
Lorrigan--Mrs. Tom, even, since many of the Black Rim women were
designated by the nicknames of their husbands)! She would have been
glad to be friendly, simply because friendliness was in her blood and
would out. She would have been glad to receive them at the Devil's
Tooth ranch for one of those all-day visits which were the custom of
the country. But for a long while they did not come. Sometimes she
would meet a family bundled to the eyes against the chill winds of
Idaho, bumping over the rough roads on their way to visit some near
neighbor who lived only ten or fifteen miles away. She would flash
them a smile while she pulled up her bronco team out of the trail to
make a generous room for their passing, and she would shout something
pleasant as they went by. And after they had gone on she would shrug
her fine, broad shoulders and call them cats, going out to a
scratching, with all the kittens mewing along. She would flap a
hand--providing the bronco team left her a hand free to flap--and
shake her head, and say, "Not for mine, thank you!" And would be hurt
down deep in her heart where it did not show, because they never
stopped at her door.

But when the boys began to come, then came the neighbor women, making
formal two-hour calls upon the new mother, eager to see and to hear
and to go away and compare notes afterward. They talked much of the
names that Belle Lorrigan called her children. The first one she named
for the hero in her first play; wanting, I suppose, a souvenir of the
time when she was fifteen and had her first speaking part on the
stage. She called her first-born Algernon Adelbert. Algernon Adelbert
Lorrigan, grandson of old Tom Lorrigan! Think of that!

But Algernon Adelbert no sooner outgrew his cradle than he was known
to all and sundry as Al Lorrigan, so that no harm was done him in
giving him such a name. He grew up lusty and arrogant, a good deal of
a bully, six feet tall, a good rider--though, not so good a rider as
his dad--a good shot, willing to help gather that million together on
the chance that he might have a share in the spending.

Al was a youth who hunted trouble for the thrill of meeting it more
than half-way, but since Tom Lorrigan happened to be his father, Al
rode off the Devil's Tooth ranch before he became the rampant young
trouble-hunter. Belle had some anxious hours during the time Al was
gone, but she never once betrayed her anxiety; which is doing pretty
well for a mother.

The second was Marmaduke LeRoy, and the third and last she recklessly
christened Lancelot Montgomery. Marmaduke never learned to spell his
name correctly, and sometimes complained that Belle had gone and named
him after a mess of preserves,--meaning marmalade, I suppose. But as
he grew older he forgot his grievance. Belle was the only person who
could remember offhand his full name, and she never called him by it
except when she was very angry; when she usually attached so many
adjectives that Marmaduke LeRoy was quite submerged. Commonly he was
called Duke, which did well enough.

Tom used to study Duke through half-closed lids and the smoke of a
cigarette, and wonder which side of the family had a yellow streak;
not the Lorrigan side, so far as Tom could judge. Nor the Delavan
side either, if Belle lived true to type. To be sure, Belle refused to
ride a horse; but then Belle was a woman and women had whims. There
was no yellow about Belle, except her hair which was pure golden.

Duke would invariably lie to dodge punishment. According to his own
theory, Duke was always blameless, always the injured party, the boy
who does right and never is given credit for his virtues. Even Belle,
who would fight for her boys as a tigress fights for its young, looked
askance at Duke while she tried, motherlike, to cover his faults from
the keen eyes of Tom.

"I'd just like to know how you come by it," she once exclaimed
exasperatedly, when Duke was ten and Lance eight. "I'd sure chop one
limb off the family tree, if I knew which one gave you the gall to lie
to me and Tom. Duke, for heaven's sake take a licking just once
without trying to lay the blame on Al or Lance--and see how proud
you'll feel afterwards!"

"Aw--lickins hur-rt!" Duke had protested, rubbing the arm Belle had
gripped none too gently, and sidled away from her.

With her hands to her hips--gracefully posed there, as became an
actress--Belle regarded him fixedly. "My Gawd!" she whispered, owning
defeat before that invulnerable selfishness of Duke's.

Her tone stung even his young crocodile-hided sensibility. "You're
always blamin' me. You'n Tom think I do everything mean on this ranch!
You think Lance is an angel! He's your pet and you let him pick on me
an' you never say a word. Lance can do any darn thing he pleases, an'
so can Al. I'm goin' to run away, first thing you know. You can have
your sweet little angel pet of a doggone ole cowardly-calf Lance!"
Then he whined, "Aw--you lemme go! I never done it, I tell yuh! It was
Lance!"

Belle gritted her teeth while she shook him. "You yellow-hearted
little whelp. I _saw you_ chasing that colt around the corral till he
broke the fence! If Tom was to know about it he'd lick you good! Duke,
why _can't_ you be a man and take the blame yourself, just once? I'd
be--I'd be so proud o' you if you only told the truth about things.
Don't you know--it's only a coward that will lie to save his own
skin?"

"Lance is a bigger coward than I am, an' you never say a word to him.
You think Lance is perfect."

"I guess you're hopeless all right," Belle retorted. "It's just a
yellow streak in you somewhere. Living with the Lorrigans, I'm hoping
you'll outgrow it. The Lorrigans sure ain't yellow!"

"I chased Blackie some, Belle," Lance volunteered, peering down over
the stable eave at his irate mother. "Duke started in and got him
going good, and when he come fogging over to this side I flopped my
arms at him. Gee, but he did stop quick! I guess if you're going to
lick Duke, you better give me about four good licks for that, Belle.
And take 'em off Duke's licking. No use licking us both for the same
thing."

Belle tilted her yellow head and looked up at her beloved youngest,
grinning down at her cheerfully from the hay roof where he sprawled
head downward, flat on his stomach.

"Well, thank the Lord one Lorrigan has got the nerve to own up to a
thing. Come on down and get your four licks, then. I can be as square
as the next one. But Duke's got it coming to him for lying to me. Tell
me, Lance, did Duke chase Blackie through the fence?"

"Aw go on, Belle! What's matter with you, asking me what Duke done?
He's the feller to ask about that. I chased Blackie about four licks'
worth. Hurry up and let's get it over with. You know it ain't pleasant
for either of us!"

"Smarty!" yelled Duke, quick to read in Belle's face what softening
effect Lance had on her temper. "Tryin' to be smart--tryin' to be
George Wash'nton! You little liar, you know you chased Blackie more'n
what I done. Sneak out of it--yeah, that's you, every time. Own up
just enough to make Belle think you're an angel. Doggone the whole
doggone outfit!"

"_Now_ what?" Tom's voice broke in upon Duke's shrill tirade. From
the back of his horse Tom looked down quizzically upon them. "Duke,
what you been up to?"

"Aw, you always think it's me! Why don't you ask Lance what he's been
up to? Why don't you lick Lance for being on the stable? If I was to
get up there and tromp around in the hay and make it leak, I know what
_I'd_ git!"

Tom sent a glance up to where Lance was hastily scrambling down a
corner. "You'd better!" he commented sternly. Then he looked at Belle,
his eyes twinkling under his scowl.

"If you can't handle these young devils, Belle, turn 'em over to me.
I'll mighty quick settle their hash for 'em."

Belle gripped tighter the squirming Duke. "I'm not a cripple yet, Tom
Lorrigan. They've both got a licking coming to 'em, and if you'll
kindly walk off stage R. C. I'll go on with the scene. You weren't
cued to come on here."

"It's your show, Belle," Tom assented, and very obligingly rode to
the other side of the stable to unsaddle his horse, and grinned to
himself when the sound of wailing and pleading and promises of the
"I'll-never-do-it-again" variety came to his ears. Belle's lickings
were distinguished chiefly by their uproar.

"Belle wallops 'em like brandin' calves," Tom used to chuckle. "They
beller a plenty while it's going on, and kick up their heels when it's
all over. I wish't my dad had licked me like that when I was a kid.
You can gamble, when I was thrashed, I knowed it!"

Duke grew up to be a very good cowpuncher, however. He knew every draw
and dry wash, every creek bottom and every canyon on the Black Rim
range; knew almost as well as the owner how many cattle carried every
brand. In the Devil's Tooth round-ups Duke held his place alongside Al
as a top hand,--disputing now and then the right of young Lance to
compete with him, but never quite daring to bring his dispute to the
point where action would take the place of words.

"Duke's sure enough a bad man--with his face," Tom once snarled to
Belle. "Make it a talking match, and Duke could lick any old woman, in
the Black Rim country."

"There's been enough fighting Lorrigans, don't you think?" Belle
smiled back at him. "Duke's dad can fight hard enough for the whole
family. I didn't think you wanted your boys to be fighters."

"I don't. But I sure do want 'em to have the fightin' stuff in 'em,
whether it ever comes out or not. Take Lance, there. Lance ain't a
fighter, either; but by the Lord John, it's there! Once get Lance
started, and I'd back him against any three men in the Black Rim. It's
in him, if the play ever come up. And it's in Al. The Lorrigan is
strong in Al. But that Duke--"

"Honey, I think maybe it's the Delavan in Duke. I remember an old maid
aunt of mine that used to bolt the door and quarrel with my mother
through the keyhole. I guess maybe Duke has got a little touch of Aunt
Jane."

"Oh, sure! First I ever heard of Aunt Jane, Belle. Takes you to think
up a reason."

"And the Lorrigan will come out, honey. He's got the look, now and
then. It's in him, you'll see."

So that is how the Lorrigan boys grew up. They thought Belle the most
beautiful, the most wonderful woman in the world,--though they never
called her mother. Belle would not have it. She refused to become a
motherly, middle-aged person, and her boys were growing altogether too
big and too masterful to look upon a golden-curled, pink-cheeked,
honey-throated Amazon as other Black Rim sons looked upon their faded,
too often shrewish maternal parent. She was just Belle. They knew no
other like her, no one with whom they might compare her. We do not
compare the sun and the moon with other suns and moons. Like Tom, they
worshipped her in their hearts, and chummed with her even before they
had outgrown her stormy chastisements. They mended her buckboards and
her harness; they galloped alongside while she drove careening across
the range, her hair flying in the wind, her mouth smiling and showing
her white teeth. They danced with her,--and having Belle for a
teacher from the time they could toddle, you may guess how the
Lorrigan boys could dance. They sang the songs she taught them; they
tried to better her record at target practice and never did it; they
quarreled with her when her temper was up and dodged her when it
became too cyclonic.

They grew up without ever having ridden on the cars, save once or
twice to Lava. Black Rim was the rim of the world to them, and their
world held all that they yearned for. Belle sheltered them from too
much knowledge of that other world, which held the past she hated and
tried to forget. Much she taught them of city manners and the little
courtesies of life. She would box the ears of the boy who neglected to
rise and offer her a chair when she entered a room, and would smoke a
cigarette with him afterward. Once she whipped her six-shooter out of
its holster and shot a hole through the crown of Al's hat, as a
tactful reminder that gentlemen always remove their hats when they
come into a house. Al remembered, after that. At fourteen even the
hardiest youth feels a slight shock when a bullet jars through his hat
crown two inches above his hair.




CHAPTER THREE

MARY HOPE DOUGLAS APPEARS


Devil's Tooth ridge, which gave the Lorrigan ranch its name, was
really a narrow hogback with a huge rock spire at one end. Crudely it
resembled a lower jaw bone with one lone tooth remaining. Three
hundred feet and more the ridge upthrust its barren crest, and the
wagon road from the ranch crawled up over it in many switchbacks and
sharp turns, using a mile and a half in the climbing. They called it
the "dug road." Which meant that teams and scrapers and dynamite and
much toil had been necessary in the making, distinguishing it from
most Black Rim roads, which followed the line of least resistance
until many passings had worn a definite trail; whereupon that trail
became an established thoroughfare legalized by custom and not to be
lightly changed for another.

Over in the next valley, beyond Devil's Tooth ridge, Alexander
Douglas had made a ranch for himself and his family. Aleck Douglas was
as Scotch as his name. He shaved his long upper lip, so that it
looked longer and more uncompromising than was necessary even to
match the Aleck Douglas disposition. His hair was wiry and stood up
from a forehead that might be called beetling. His eyebrows were heavy
and came so near to meeting that Mary Hope used to wish that she
dared lay one small finger between father's eyebrows, just to see if
there would be room. His eyes were as close together as his thin
beak of a nose would permit, and his ears were long and narrow and set
flat against his head. He was tall and he was lank and he was honest
to his last bristling hair. He did not swear--though he could wither
one with vituperative epithets--and he did not smoke and he did not
drink--er--save a wee nip of Scotch "whusky" to break up a cold,
which frequently threatened his hardy frame. He was harshly
religious, and had there been a church in the Black Rim country you
would have seen Aleck Douglas drive early to its door every Sunday
morn, and sit straight-backed in a front pew and stare hard at the
minister through the longest of sermons,--providing, of course, that
church and minister were good Presbyterian.

He loved the dollars, how he did love his dollars! He loved his
cattle, because they represented dollars. He nursed them, dollars and
animals alike, and to lose one wrung the heart of him.

His wife was a meek little thing in his presence, as the wives of such
men as Aleck Douglas usually are. She also was rigidly honest,
dogmatically religious and frugal and hard-working and intolerant of
the sins of others.

Early she taught Mary Hope that beyond Devil's Tooth ridge lived those
wicked Lorrigans, whose souls were bartered to the devil and whose
evil ways were a stench in the nostrils of God. Mary Hope used to
wonder if God turned up his nose when there was a stench in his
nostrils,--for instance, when Belle Lorrigan hurtled past with her
bronks and her buckboard and her yellow hair flying. Mary Hope
wondered, too, what the Lorrigan boys had got from the devil in
exchange for their souls. Some magic, perhaps, that would protect them
from death and accident. Yet that seemed not true, for Al Lorrigan
broke his leg, one spring round-up. The devil ought to have saved his
horse from falling down with him, if the devil had Al Lorrigan's
soul.

That had happened when Mary Hope was twelve and Al Lorrigan was
eighteen. She heard her father tell her mother about it; and her
father had set his whiskered lip against his long, shaven upper lip
almost with a smack.

"They'll come to a bad end, all of them," he declared sententiously.
"Violent deaths had all the Lorrigans before them--all save Tom, and
the Lord but stays his hand for a time from that man. The wicked shall
flourish as a green bay tree."

"Father, how can a tree be green and then bay too!" Mary Hope
ventured to inquire. "Is it just a Bible tree, or does it flourish
somewhere really?"

Aleck Douglas hid his month behind his palm and coughed. "'Tis not bay
like a horse, child. 'Tis not the color that I'm speaking of."

"That painted Jezebel, Belle Lorrigan, drove past the house to-day
within a stone's throw," Mrs. Douglas informed her husband. "I wush,
Aleck, that ye would fence me a yard to keep the huzzy from driving
over my very doorstep. She had that youngest brat of hers in the seat
with her--that Lance. And as they went past on the keen gallop--and
the horses both in a lather of sweat--the boy impudently shook his
fist at me where I was glancing from my window. And his mother lookit
and laughed, the Jezebel!"

"Mother, Lance only waved his hand."

"And why should Lance be waving his hand when he should pass the
house? Did he think that a Douglas would come so low as to wave at a
Lorrigan?"

Mary Hope ducked her sleek little pig-tailed head outside the door and
shooed vehemently at a dingy black hen that happened to be passing.
Mary Hope knew that a Douglas had stooped so low as to wave back at
Lance Lorrigan, but it seemed unwise to tell her mother so.

When Mary Hope was permitted to have a gentle old cow-pony of her own,
she rode as often as she dared to Devil's Tooth ridge. By short cuts
down certain washes which the trail avoided with many winding detours,
she could lope to the foot of the ridge in forty minutes by the old
alarm clock which she carried one day in her arms to time the trip.
She could climb by another shortcut trail, to the Devil's Tooth in
twenty minutes. She could come down in fifteen, she discovered. In a
three-hour ride she could reach the-Devil's Tooth, spend a whole hour
looking down upon the ranch house of the wicked Lorrigans, and ride
home again. And by choosing the short cuts she practically eliminated
the chance of being observed.

If she could see Belle go tearing down the trail with her bronks and
her buckboard she would be horrifiedly happy. The painted Jezebel
fascinated Mary Hope, who had read all about that wicked woman in the
Bible, and had shivered in secret at her terrible fate. Belle Lorrigan
might never be eaten by dogs, since dogs are few in cattleland and are
kept strictly at home, but if Mary Hope's mother was any true
prophetess, the painted Jezebel's final doom would be quite as
horrible.

At the infrequent parties which the Douglas household countenanced,--such
as Christmas trees and Fourth of July picnics, Mary Hope would sit and
stare fixedly at Belle Lorrigan and wonder if all painted Jezebels
were beautiful and happy and smiling. If so, why was unadorned virtue
to be commended? Mary tried not to wish that her hair was yellow and hung
in curls, and that she had even white teeth and could sing and dance so
wonderfully that everything stopped and every one looked and listened
from the minute she began until she stopped.

More than anything else in her starved young life, Mary Hope wanted to
see the inside of the Lorrigan house. The painted Jezebel had a real
piano, and she could play it, people said. She played ungodly songs,
but Mary Hope had a venturesome spirit. She wanted to see an
instrument of the devil, hear the painted Jezebel play on it and sing
her ungodly songs.

One day when she had ridden to the top of the Devil's Tooth a great,
daring plan came to her. She wanted to ride down there--a half mile
down the bluff, a mile and a half by the road--but she would never
dare take that trail deliberately. Her father might hear of it, or her
mother. Nor could she ask the Lorrigans not to tell of her visit. But
if her horse ran away with her and took her down the ridge, she could
ask them to please not tell her father, because if he knew that her
horse ran away he would not let her ride again. It seemed to Mary Hope
that all the Lorrigans would sympathize with her dilemma. They would
probably ask her into the house. She would see the piano, and she
could ask the painted Jezebel to play on it. That would be only
polite. It did seem a shame that a girl thirteen years old, going on
fourteen, should never have seen or heard a piano. Mary Hope looked at
the sun and made breathless calculation. Having just arrived at the
Devil's Tooth, she had an hour to spend. And if she took the steep,
winding trail that the Lorrigans rode, the trail where old man
Lorrigan's horse had fallen down with him, she could be at the house
in a very few minutes.

"Ye look little enough like a runaway horse, ye wind-broken, spavined
old crow-bait, you!" she criticized Rab as he stood half asleep in the
sun. "I shall have to tell a lee about you, and for that God may
wither the tongue of me. I shall say that a rattler buzzed beneath
your nose--though perhaps I should say it was behind ye, Rab, else
they will wonder that ye didna run away home. If ye could but lift an
ear and roll the eye of you, wild-like, perhaps they will believe me.
But I dinna ken--I wouldna believe it mesel!"

Rab waggled an ear when she mounted, switched his tail pettishly when
she struck him with the quirt, reluctantly obeyed the rein, and set
his feet on the first steep pitch of the Devil's Tooth trail. Old as
he was, Rab had never gone down that trail and he chose his footing
circumspectly. It was no place for a runaway, as Mary Hope speedily
discovered when she had descended the first dip and entered the cleft
which the Lorrigans called the Slide.

A slide it was, and down it Rab slid on his rump. An old watercourse,
with sheer rock walls that formed the base of the Tooth itself. Had
there been room Mary Hope would have turned back. But the cleft was so
narrow that a pack horse must be adept at squeezing past protuberances
and gauging the width of its pack if it would travel the trail. A
sharp turn presently showed her the end of the cleft, and they emerged
thankfully upon a sage-grown shelf along which the trail proceeded
more gently.

Then came another cleft, with great boulders at the end, which a horse
must negotiate carefully if he would not break a leg or two. It was
here that old Tom Lorrigan had died under his horse before help came
that way. But Rab had covered many rough trails, and he picked his way
over the boulders safely,--though not as a runaway horse should have
traveled.

After that there came a treacherous bit of shale, across which Mary
Hope thought it best to lead her runaway steed which refused for a
time to venture farther. Being a Douglas she was obstinate. Being
obstinate, she would not turn back, especially since the trail would
be even worse in the climbing than it was in the descent. Rab, she
realized worriedly, could not slide up that narrow, rock-bottomed
cleft down which he had coasted so readily.

"They must be devil horses that ride this way, Rab," she sighed when
she had remounted on the lower margin of the shale. "And the Lorrigans
na doot have magic. But I dinna think that even they could run away
down it."

She struck Rab sharply with the quirt and dug in her heels. If Rab was
to run it must be immediately, for the level valley lay just below and
the Lorrigan house was around the next point of the hill.

Rab would not run. He stopped abruptly and kicked with both feet. Mary
Hope struck him again, a little harder, and Rab kicked again, more
viciously. The trail was much better for kicking than for running, but
Mary Hope would not accept the compromise, and at last Rab yielded to
the extent of loping cautiously down the last steep declivity. When he
reached level ground he laid back his ears and galloped as fast as his
stiffened shoulders would let him. So Mary Hope very nearly achieved a
dashing pace as she neared the corrals of the wicked Lorrigans.

"Well! Yuh traveling, or just goin' somewhere?" A young voice yelled
at her as she went past the stable.

"My horse--is--he rinned away wi' me!" screamed Mary Hope, her
pigtails snapping as Rab slowed up and stopped.

"He rinned away wi' you? When? You musta been purty young for riding
when _that_ horse rinned away!" Lance came toward her, grinning and
slapping his hat against his fringed chaps before he set it upon his
head; an uncommonly handsome head, by the way, with the Lorrigan's
dark eyes and hair and his mother's provocative mouth. "Well, seeing
your horse ain't going to rin no further, you might as well git down
and stay awhile."

"I will not. I didna come to visit, if you please."

Mary Hope's cheeks were hot but confusion could not break her Scotch
spirit.

"Want to borrow something?" Lance stood looking at her with much
enjoyment. A girl in short skirts was fair game for any one's teasing,
especially when she blushed as easily as did Mary Hope. "Want to
borrow a horse that will rin away wi' you."

"Lance, you devil, get out and leave the girl alone. I'm ashamed of
you! Haven't you got any manners at all?--after all the willows and
the good powder I've wasted on you! Get back to that pasture fence
before I take a club to you for such acting!"

Before Belle's wrath Lance retreated, and Mary Hope found the courage
to wrinkle her nose at him when he glanced her way. "He rinned away to
save himself a whupping," she commented, and made sure that he heard
it, and hoped that he would realize that she spoke "Scotchy" just for
his special benefit.

"All right for you, Belle Lorrigan!" Lance called back, retaliating
for Mary Hope's grimace by a kiss thrown brazenly in the expectation
of seeing her face grow redder; which it did immediately. "Careful of
that horse--he might rinned away again!"

"That'll do for you, young man!" Whereupon Belle picked up a small
stone and threw it with such accurate aim that Lance's hat went off.
"Good thing for you that I haven't got a gun on me, or I'd dust your
heels for you!" Then she turned to Mary Hope, who was listening with
titillating horror to the painted Jezebel's unorthodox method of
reproving her offspring. "Get right down, honey, and come in and rest.
And don't mind Lance; he's an awful tease, especially when he likes a
person. Tie your horse to the fence--or turn him in the corral, if
he'll let you catch him again."

"I--I don't believe I could stop. I--I only came by because I--my
horse--" Mary Hope stammered and blushed so red that her freckles were
invisible. After all, it was very hard to tell a lie, she discovered.

"There's something I like about this horse," said Belle, running her
plump white hand down the nose of Rab. "He's neighborly, anyway. He
brought you here against your will, I can see that. And now he's here
he sort of takes it for granted you'll be friendly and stop a while.
Don't you think you ought to be as friendly as your horse, honey?"

"I--I am friendly. I--I always wished I could come and see you. But
mother--mother doesna visit much among the neighbors; she--she's
always busy."

"I don't visit much, myself," said Belle dryly. "But that ain't saying
I can't be friendly. Come on in, and we'll have some lemonade."

Sheer astonishment brought Mary Hope down from her horse. All her life
she had taken it for granted that lemonade was sacred to the Fourth of
July picnics, just as oranges grew for Christmas trees only. She
followed Belle dumbly into the house, and once inside she remained
dumb with awe at what seemed to her to be the highest pinnacle of
grandeur.

There was the piano with a fringed scarf draped upon its top, and
pictures in frames standing upon the scarf in orderly rows. There were
many sheets of music,--and never a hymn book. There were great chairs
with deep upholstery which Mary observed with amazement was not red
plush, nor even blue plush, yet which appealed to her instincts for
beauty. There was no center table with fringed spread and family album
and a Bible and a conch shell. Instead there was a long table before a
window--a table littered with all sorts of things: a box of revolver
cartridges, a rifle laid down in the middle of scattered newspapers,
a bottle of oil, more music, a banjo, a fruit jar that did duty as a
vase for wild flowers, a half-finished, braided quirt and four silver
dollars lying where they had been carelessly flung down. To Mary Hope,
reared in a household where dollars were precious things, that last
item was the most amazing of all. The Lorrigans must be rich,--as rich
as they were wicked. She thrilled anew at her own daring.

Belle brought lemonade, wonderful lemonade, with an egg beaten to
yellow froth and added the last minute. Mary Hope sipped and marveled.
After that, Belle played on the piano and sang songs which Mary Hope
had never heard before and which she thought must be the songs the
angels sang in Heaven, although there was nothing to suggest harps or
hallelujahs. Love songs they were, mostly. The sun slipped around and
shone through a window on Belle's head, so that her yellow hair
glistened like fine threads of gold. Mary Hope watched it dreamily and
wondered how a Jezebel could be so beautiful and so good.

"You'd better run along home now, honey," Belle said at last when she
had finished her eighth song. "I'd love to have you stay all
night--but I reckon there'd be trouble. Your dad ain't any too mild,
I've heard. But I hope you won't wait until your horse runs away with
you again. I want you to come real soon. And come early so you can
stay longer. I'll teach you to play the piano, honey. You ought to
learn, seeing you love it so."

That night Mary Hope dreamed of playing strange, complex compositions
on a piano which Lance Lorrigan had given her. The next morning and
for many days after she still dreamed of playing entrancing strains
upon a piano, and of Lance Lorrigan who had thrown her a kiss. Belle
had said that Lance always teased a person he liked, and in that one
remark lay the stuff of many dreams.




CHAPTER FOUR

A MATTER OF BRANDS


On the grassy expanse known locally as Injun Creek, fifteen hundred
head of cattle were milling restlessly in a close-held herd over which
gray dust hovered and settled and rose again. Toward it other cattle
came lowing, trotting now and then when the riders pressed close,
essaying a retreat when the way seemed clear. From Devil's Tooth they
came, and from Lava Bed way, and from the rough sandstone ridges of
Mill Creek. Two by two the riders, mere moving dots at first against a
monotone of the rangeland, took form as they neared the common center.
Red cattle, black cattle, spotted and dingy white, with bandy-legged,
flat-bodied calves keeping close to their mothers, kicking up their
heels in sheer joy of their new life when the pace slowed a little,
seeking a light lunch whenever the cows stopped to cast a wary glance
back at their pursuer. A dozen brands were represented in that
foregathering: The NL brand of Tom Lorrigan on most, with its various
amendments which differentiated the property of other members of the
family, since all of the Lorrigans owned cattle. There was the NL
Block of Belle Lorrigan, the ANL which was Al's brand, the DNL of Duke
and the LNL which belonged to Lance; monograms all of them, deftly
constructed with the fewest possible lines. There was that invitation
to the unlawful artistry of brand-working, the Eleven which Sleek
Douglas thought quite sufficient to mark his cattle. It was merciful
to the calves, he maintained, and as to thieves, the dishonest would
be punished by law and the Douglas wrath. The Miller brand, a plain
Block, showed now and then upon the rump of some animal. The AJ fled
occasionally before a rider, and there were brands alien to the Black
Rim; brands on cattle that had drifted down from the Snake through the
Lava Creek pass, or over the sage-grown ridges farther north.

His rifle sheathed in a saddle holster under his thigh, his black eyes
roving here and there and letting no small movement of men or animals
escape their seeing glances, Tom Lorrigan rode to the round-up, lord
of the range, steadfast upon the trail of his "million on the hoof" of
which he dreamed. Beside him rode Al, and the two of them were talking
while they rode.

"He ain't safe, I tell you," Al was saying in the tone of reiteration.
"And you needn't ask me how I know. I know it, that's all. Maybe he's
too damn' agreeable or something. Anyway, I know I don't like the way
his eyes set in his head."

"A man that wasn't safe wouldn't dare come into the Black Rim and make
the play he's makin'," Tom contended. "I've had my eye on him ever
since he come. I've checked up what he says at different times--they
tally like the truth. I can't find nothing wrong."

"I've got him set down for a spotter," said Al.

"If he ain't on the level it'll show up sooner or later," Tom
contended. "I've got my eye on him. I dunno what you pin your argument
on, Al, I'll be darned if I do."

"Well, watch out for Cheyenne. That's all. You're pretty keen, all
right, but all a man's got to do to get on your blind side is to blow
in here with his chin on his shoulder and his horse rode to a whisper
and claim to you he's hidin' out. Cheyenne ain't right, I tell yuh.
You take a tip from me and watch him."

"Takes a kid to tell his dad where to head in at!" growled Tom. "How
do you reckon I ever got along before your time. Ever figure that out,
Al?"

"Now, what's eatin' on old Scotty Douglas, do yuh reckon? That's him,
all right. I could tell him on horseback ten mile off. He rides like a
Mormon."

Tom grunted. His boys, he had long ago discovered, were very apt to
find some excuse for changing the subject whenever he mentioned the
past which had not held their arrogant young selves. Tom resented the
attitude of superior wisdom which they were prone to assume. They were
pretty smart kids, but if they thought they were smarter than their
dad they sure had a change of heart coming to them.

"Supposin' it is old Scotty. Do you reckon, Al, I've got you along for
a guide, to point out what my eyes is getting too poor to see? As for
Cheyenne," he reverted angrily to the argument, "as for Cheyenne, when
you've growed to be a man, you'll find it's just as much the mark of a
fool to go along suspecting everybody as it is to bank on everybody.
You think now it's funny to put the Judas brand on every man you don't
know. It ain't. It's a kid's trick. Boys git that way when they begin
to sprout hair under their noses. I been pretty patient with yuh, Al.
You're growing up fast, and you're feeling your oats. I make
allowances, all kinds. But by the humpin' hyenas, don't you start in
telling me where to head in at with my own outfit! If you do, I'll
jest about wear out a willer switch on yuh!"

This to a youth almost old enough to vote was dire insult. Al pulled
up his horse. "Run your own outfit and be darned to yuh!" he cried
hotly, and spurred off in the direction of the ranch.

Tom laughed shortly and rolled a cigarette. "Thinks now it'll bust up
the round-up if he goes," he opined. "Lucky for my kids I ain't as
strict as my old dad was; they wouldn't have any hide left, I
reckon."

Up loped Aleck Douglas then, riding stiff-legged, his bony elbows
jerking awkwardly with the motion of his horse, a rusty black vest
dangling open under his coat which flapped in the wind. That the
Douglas wrath rode with him Tom saw from the corner of his eye and
gave no sign.

"Hello," said Tom casually and drew a match along the stamped fork of
his saddle. "You're quite a stranger." He lighted his cigarette,
holding his reins lightly in one hand while he did so; gave the reins
a gentle flip to one side and sent his horse after a cow and calf that
showed symptoms of "breaking back."

"Mister Lorrigan, 'tis aboot a spotted yearlin' that I've come to
speak with ye. I've found the hide of her in the brush beneath yon
hill, and the brand is cut from it. But I wad swear to the hide wi'out
the brand. 'Twas a yearlin' I ken weel, Mister Lorrigan." He rode
alongside, and his close-set little eyes regarded keenly Tom's face.

"A spotted yearling with the brand cut out, hey? That looks kinda bad.
Have you got the hide with you?"

"I have no got the hide wi' me, but I ken weel whaur it lies, Mister
Lorrigan, and I thinkit so do you."

"Hm-m. You'd ought to of brought it along." Tom's glance went out
toward the herd and the cattle lumbering toward it far and near. "The
range is plumb lousy with spotted yearlings, Scotty. What do you
expect me to do about it?"

The Douglas face worked spasmodically before he spoke. "I expect ye,
Mr. Lorrigan, to pay for yon beastie. I ken weel ye could name the mon
that stickit the knife in her throat. An' she made fine eatin', I have
na doot. But 'tis the law, Mister Lorrigan, that a mon should pay for
the meat he consumes."

"Meaning, of course, that you think I'm feeding Douglas meat to my
outfit. Don't you think you're kinda hasty? I kill a beef about every
three or four days in round-up time. The boys work hard and they eat
hard. And they eat NL beef, Scotty; don't overlook that fact. Hides
ain't worth anything much, but salt's cheap, too. I ain't throwin'
away a dollar when it's no trouble to save it. If you're any curious
at all, you ride over to ranch and count all the green hides you can
find. Belle, she'll show 'em to you. Take a look at the brands, and
figure it out yourself, I don't know how many you'll find, but I'll
gamble you a dozen cows against one that you'll wonder what went with
all the beef that was in them hides. Humpin' hyenas! Ain't I got
cattle enough of my own, without rustlin' off my neighbors?"

"Aye. Ye ha' cattle, Mister Lorrigan; I ken weel ye should no' be put
to it for a wee bit meat--but I ken weel yon spotty yearlin' was
mine. I ken ye've been campin' thereabout--and it wad seem, Mister
Lorrigan, that the salt was no sa plentifu' when the spotty yearlin'
was kilt."

The downright foolhardiness of the Douglas wrath held Tom's
hand,--though of a truth that hand trembled and crept backward. Nor
was Aleck Douglas nearsighted; he saw the movement and his bearded
underlip met his shaven underlip in a straight line.

"Ye do weel to be reachin' for the gun, Mister Lorrigan. I dinna carry
aye weapon save the truth."

Tom flushed. "Blame your oatmeal soul, if I reached for my gun, you
wouldn't be telling me about it!" he exploded. "Carry the truth, do
yuh? You've got to show me where you keep it, then. If you wasn't an
old man--and a darn fool on top of that."

"'Tis no brave to cover shame wi' bitter words, Tam Lorrigan. 'Tis the
way of ye to bluster and bully until the neighbors all are affrighted
to face ye and yere ill deeds."

Toward them clattered two riders hotly pursuing a lean, long-legged
steer with a wide spread of horns and a gift of speed that carried him
forging past the disputants. Tom wheeled mechanically and gave chase,
leaving the Douglas wrath to wax hotter or to cool if it would. It was
a harsh accusation that Aleck Douglas had made, and that he did make
it seemed to prove that he had what he considered very good evidence
that he was right. Tom was well schooled in troubles of that kind. He
did not take the matter so indifferently as Douglas believed.

Duke and Mel Wilson, riding hard, came upon Tom just as he had roped
and thrown the steer in a shallow draw that hid them from the level
where Aleck Douglas waited.

"Hey!" Tom beckoned them close. "Old Douglas says there's a hide in
the willows this side of Squaw Butte, with the brand cut out; a
spotted yearling, and he claims it's his and he can swear to it
without the brand. I don't know a darn thing about it. Nobody does in
this outfit; I'll stake all I've got on that. But he's on the
fight--and a mule's a sheep alongside him when he's got his back up.
He left the hide where he found it. Haze this steer and ride over
there and see what there is to his talk. If you find a hide cached in
the willows, put it outa sight. We don't want any rustling scraps
started on this range; that's bad medicine always. If he can't produce
any hide, he can't start anything but talk--and talk's cheap."

A few moments later they came tearing up out of the draw, the steer
running strong, the three riders still hotly pursuing. Duke and Mel
rushed it on to the herd, and Tom dropped out of the race and came
along across to where Douglas wrath had not cooled but had smoldered
and waited for the wind of opposition to fan it to flame again.

"Well, you still mournin' over your spotty yearlin'?" Tom called. "You
must have more time than you know what to do with to-day. Us, we have
to _work_."

"If it's to the round-up ye're going, then I'll ride wi' ye, Tom
Lorrigan. I'm a fair mon and I wush na ill to my neighbors. But I
canna twiddle the thumbs whilst others fare well on Douglas beef."

"You can ride where you please; it's open range. But if you ride to
the herd I'll show you forty yearlings that I'll bet are dead ringers
for the one that you claim was killed. I never seen that hide neither,
unless maybe when the critter was using it.

"Now, I don't want any trouble with yuh, Scotty. But I tell yuh right
now I can't stand for much more of this talk about beef rustling.
Thief's a pretty hard word to use to a man's face--and get away with
it."

"'Tis a hard mon I'm usin' it tae," the Douglas retorted grimly.

"Braggin' about your nerve, are yuh, Scotty?"

"I have a name, Tam Lorrigan, and 'tisna Scotty." The Douglas face
twisted with anger. "I will no bandy worrds with ye. 'Tis ill I should
descend to the level o' them that deespitefully use me."

"Deespitefully!--why, humpin' hyenas! Ain't I letting yuh _live_? And
do yuh reckon any other man could walk up to me and call me a thief
and live long enough to take it back? Just because you're old, and
such a blamed fool you go around without a gun on yuh, I'm keepin' my
hands off you. I call yuh a coward. You wouldn't a dared to come over
here with a gun on yuh and talk the way you've done. You've got me
hog-tied. You know it. And damn yuh, I'll fight yuh now with the
law--which is the only way a coward will fight.

"You've done a heap of chawin' around about the Lorrigans, Scotty.
Don't think I ain't heard it. Maybe it's your religion to backbite
yore neighbors and say what you wouldn't dare to say to their face
with a gun on you so we'd be equal. I've passed it up. I've considered
the source and let it go. But when you come belly-achin' around about
me stealin' a spotty yearlin'--jest as if there wasn't but one on the
Black Rim range!--why, damn it, _you'll prove it_! Do you get that?
You'll prove it before a jury, or I'll sue yuh for libel and bust yuh.
I don't go much on the law, but by Henry, I'll use it on you!"

The Douglas eyes flickered uncertainly, but the Douglas mouth was
unyielding. "The law can no be cheatit so easy, Tam Lorrigan. I hae no
wush to send ye tae jail--but ye ken weel that wad be the penalty for
killin' yon beastie in the willows. I came to settle the matter fair
between neighbors, and tae warn ye to cease your evil doings on the
range. I wadna see yer woman come tae grief--"

"You can cut out that mercy talk, Scotty. And don't try to bring Belle
into this. If it comes to a showdown, lemme advise you, you'd better
sidestep Belle. The grief would all be yourn, if you and Belle lock
horns, and I'm telling yuh so."

They had reached the nearest margin of the herd. Cheyenne, a nameless
estray from the Wyoming ranges, chanced to be holding herd where the
two rode up. At him Tom looked, suspicion for the moment sharpening
his glance.

"You can ask this man what he knows about any spotted hide over by
Squaw Butte," he invited the Douglas stiffly. "He's practically a
stranger to the outfit--been here about a month. Maybe his word'll be
worth something to yuh--I dunno. You can ask him."

Douglas rode over to Cheyenne and said what he had to say. Tom
meanwhile held the herd and meditated on the petty injustices of
life--perhaps--and wished that a real he-man had come at him the way
Douglas had come. It irked Tom much to be compelled to meet hard words
with tolerant derision. Toleration was not much of a factor in his
life. But since he must be tolerant, he swung his horse to meet the
Douglas when the brief conversation with Cheyenne was over. The
Douglas head was shaking slowly, owning disappointment.

"Well, yuh might as well make the rounds, Scotty. Go on and ask all
the boys. If I asked 'em myself you might think it was a frame-up. And
when you've made the rounds, take a look through the herd. The chances
are that you'll find your spotty yearlin' walking around with her hide
on her. And when you're plumb through, you make tracks away from my
outfit. My patience is strainin' the buttons right now, looking at
your ugly mug. And lemme tell yuh--and you mark it down in your little
red book so yuh won't forget it--after you've peddled your woes to the
hull outfit, you bring in that hide and some proof, or you get down on
them marrow bones and apologize! I'm plumb tired of the way you act."

Aleck Douglas scowled, opened his hard lips to make a bitter answer
and reconsidered. He went off instead to interview the men, perhaps
thinking that adroit questioning might reveal a weak point somewhere
in their denial.

Tom rode over to Cheyenne. "Scotty's got his war clothes on," he
observed carelessly.

"Shore has," Cheyenne grinned. "But that's all right. He didn't make
nothin' off me. I never give him any satisfaction at all."

Tom's brows pulled together. "Well, now, if you know anything about
any hide with the brand cut out, you'd better come through,
Cheyenne."

"I never said I knowed anything about it. I guess mebby that's why I
couldn't give him no satisfaction." Cheyenne still grinned, but he
did not meet Tom's eyes.

"You spoke kinda queer for a man who don't know nothing, Cheyenne. Did
yuh think mebby it wasn't all NL beef you been eating?"

"Why, no. I never meant anything like that at all. I only said--"

"Straight talk don't need no explainin', Cheyenne. The Devil's Tooth
outfit shore likes the taste of its own beef. If any man fails to
agree with that, I want him to speak up right now."

Cheyenne pinched out the fire in his cigarette and flipped the stub
away from him. He did not look at Tom when he said:

"NL beef shore suits me. I don't know about any other brand. I ain't
et none to judge by."

"You bet your life you ain't," snapped Tom, as he turned away. "When
you sample another brand you won't be drawin' wages with this
outfit."

He rode away to the wagon, where a fire was already burning and the
branding irons heating. Cheyenne, with his hat pulled down over his
forehead so that he looked out from under the brim that shaded his
face, watched Tom queerly, a corner of his lips lifted in a half smile
that was not pleasant.




CHAPTER FIVE

THEY RIDE AND THEY DO NOT TELL WHERE


Aleck Douglas, having questioned the crew as Tom had suggested, and
having inexorably ridden through the herd--in search of brands that
had been "worked," or for other evidence of the unlawful acquisition
of wealth, rather than in hope of finding his spotted yearling--rode
away with the parting threat that he would "gang to the shuriff and
hae a talk wi' him." Tom had advised him of one or two other
destinations where he hoped the Douglas would arrive without any delay
whatever, and the branding proceeded rather slowly with the crew three
men short.

Duke and Mel Wilson rode in about three o'clock with a few cows and
calves which they had gleaned from some brushy draw to cover their
real errand. By the time they had snatched a hasty meal at the wagon a
mile away, and had caught up fresh horses, the afternoon's work was
nearly over. A little earlier than usual, Tom kicked the branding fire
apart, ordered the herd thrown on water and grazed back to the
bed-ground that had been used during round-up time ever since he could
remember, and rode slowly toward camp, whither the lucky ones not on
herd were speeding.

Cheyenne, Tom observed, seemed in a greater hurry than the others, and
he beckoned to him a slim, swarthy-skinned youth who answered to the
euphonious name of Sam Pretty Cow, who was three-quarters Indian and
forgiven the taint for the ability to ride anything he ever tried to
ride, rope anything he ever swung his loop at, and for his unfailing
good humor which set him far above his kind.

"Cheyenne's in a hurry to-night, Sam."

"Yeah. Ride hell out of his horse. I dunno, me." Sam grinned amiably
at his boss.

"I wish you would camp on his trail, Sam. He'll maybe ride somewhere
to-night."

"Yeah. Uh-huh. You bet," acquiesced Sam, and leaned forward a little,
meaning to gallop after Cheyenne.

"Hold on a minute! What did Scotty have to say, Sam?"

"Him? Talk a lot about spotty yearlin' he says is dead. Asking who
kills them calf. Search me, I dunno."

"Hear any talk among the boys about beef rustling?"

"Uh-huh. First I hear is them sour-face asking me who kills them
critter. Me, I dunno."

"If you hear anything about it, Sam, let me know. Scotty thinks we
done it."

"Yeah. Uh-huh. Anybody does something mean, everybody says, 'Damn
Lorrigans done it.' Too much talk in the Black Rim. Talking under
their hats all the time but no liking to fight them Lorrigans. Uh-huh.
They're scared, you bet."

"They'll have something to get scared at, if they ain't careful. I'm
getting tired of it," said Tom gloomily.

"Yeah, you bet!" agreed Sam, his voice all sympathy. Then seeing that
Tom had no immediate intention of saying more, he touched his horse
with his long-shanked spurs and hurried on to "camp on the trail of
Cheyenne."

Tom had nearly reached camp when Duke came pounding up behind him,
coming from the herd. Duke set his horse up, in two jumps slowing from
a gallop to a walk. Tom turned his head but he did not speak. Nor did
Duke wait for questions.

"Dad, we didn't find any hide over by Squaw Butte," he announced
abruptly. "Mel and I hunted every foot of the willows. I saw where a
critter had been killed, all right. There was some scuffed-out tracks
and blood on the ground. But there wasn't any hide. Scotty musta
cached it somewheres."

"Scotty claims he left it where he found it, for evidence," Tom said
gloomily.

"Darned if I'd take the blame for other folks' rustling," Duke
declared. "I wisht he'd of come to me with his tale of woe. I'd a
showed him where to head in, mighty darned sudden. I'd of asked where
was his proof; there's other cow outfits in the Black Rim besides the
Devil's Tooth, I'd tell him. And if he didn't have mighty darned good
evidence, I'd of--"

"Yes, I expect you would of tore the earth up all round him," Tom
interrupted drily. "You boys shore are fighty, all right--with your
faces. What I'm interested in, is whereabouts you and Mel hunted. That
hide wouldn't show up like the Devil's Tooth--understand. And Scotty
was bawling around like a man that's been hurt in the pocket. He found
a hide, and if it ain't his he shore thinks it is, and that's just
about the same. And we camped over there three days ago. Where all did
you and Mel look?"

"All over, wherever a hide could be cached. There ain't any over
there. Scotty musta dreamt it--or else he buried it."

"Scotty ain't the dreamy kind. Might be possible that the ones that
done the killing went back and had a burying--which they'd oughta
have had at the time. I can't sabe a man rustling beef and leaving
the hide laying around, unless--" Tom pulled his eyebrows together
in quick suspicion. "It kinda looks to me like a frame-up," he
resumed from his fresh viewpoint. "Well, you and Mel keep it under
your hats, Duke. Don't say nothing to any of the boys at all. But if
any of the boys has anything to say, you listen. Scotty made the
rounds to-day--talked to the whole bunch. They know all about his
spotty yearlin', gol darn him! I'd like to know if any of 'em has got
any inside dope. There's strangers in the outfit this spring. And,
Duke, you kinda keep your eye on Cheyenne. Al seems to think he
ain't right--but Al has got to the suspicious age, when every man
and his dog packs a crime on his conscience. You kinda stall around
and see if Cheyenne lets slip anything."

"What would happen to old Scotty Douglas if he lost a bunch, for gosh
sake? Drop dead, I reckon," grumbled Duke. "He's sure making a lot of
fuss over one measly yearlin'."

"Yeah--but I've saw bigger fusses made over smaller matters, son," Tom
drawled whimsically. "I saw two men killed over a nickel in change,
once. It ain't the start; it's the finish that counts."

"Well, looking at it that way, uh course--"

"That's the only way to look at it, son. Did you think, maybe, that I
hazed you over to find that hide and bury it, just to keep it from
scentin' up the scenery? It's what I could smell farther ahead that I
was after. If you'd looked ahead a little further, maybe you'd of
looked a little closer in the willers."

To this Duke had nothing to say; and presently he loped on, leaving
Tom to ride slowly and turn the matter of the spotted yearling over
and over in his mind until he had reached some definite conclusion.

Tom had the name of being a dangerous man, but he had not earned it by
being hasty. His anger was to be feared because it smoldered long,
rather than because it exploded into quick violence. He wanted to see
the trail ahead of him--and just now he thought he saw Trouble waiting
on the turn. No Lorrigan had ever ridden the other way because Trouble
waited ahead, but one Lorrigan at least would advance with his eyes
open and his weapons ready to his hand.

"Bring your proof," he had said in effect to Aleck Douglas, "or stand
trial for libel. Since you won't fight with guns, I'll fight you with
the law." Very good, if he could be sure that the Douglas would fail
to produce his proof.

Tom knew well enough the reputation he bore in the Black Rim country.
Before the coming of Belle, and later, of the boys, Tom had done his
share toward earning that reputation. But Belle and the boys had
changed his life far more than appeared on the surface. They had held
his rope from his neighbors' cattle, for one thing, though his
neighbors never had credited him with honesty.

It is true that Tom could remember certain incidents of the round-up
that had added to his herd and brought him a little nearer the
million-dollar mark. Without remorse he remembered, and knew that any
cowman in the country would do the same, or worse if he dared. For
branding irons do not always inquire very closely into the parentage
of a calf that comes bouncing up stiff-legged at the end of a
cowpuncher's rope. Nor need a maverick worry very long because he
belongs to no one, so long as cowmen ride the range. Cattle would
always stray into the Black Rim country from ranges across the
mountains, and of these the Black Rim took its toll. He supposed
strange irons were set now and then on the hide of an NL animal across
the mountains--but the branders had better not let him catch them at
it! On the other hand, he would see to it that they did not catch him
branding mavericks on his own range. To Tom that seemed fair
enough,--a give-and-take game of the rangeland. According to Tom's
code he was as honest as his neighbors, and that was honest enough for
practical purposes.

It happened that he had not killed Aleck Douglas' spotted yearling.
And to be accused of the theft hurt.

"Why, humpin' hyenas! If I'd a beefed that critter, old Scotty
wouldn't ever have found no hide to catch me on! What kinda mark does
he think I am! Rustle a beef and leave the hide laying around? why,
any darn fool would know better than that!"

It was characteristic of the Lorrigan influence that when Tom rode
into camp every one of the crew save his own sons quieted a little;
not enough to suggest timidity, but to a degree that told how well
they knew that their master was present.

That master quietly took stock of his men while they ate their supper
and loafed and smoked and talked. Cheyenne had unobtrusively retired
to the bed tent. With his thumbs pushed down inside his belt Tom
strolled past and slanted a glance inside. Cheyenne was squatted on
his heels shaving with cold lather and a cracked looking-glass propped
against a roll of bedding, and a razor which needed honing. In turning
his head to look at Tom he nicked his chin and while he stopped the
bleeding with a bit of old newspaper the size of a small finger-nail
he congratulated himself in the mistaken belief that Tom had not seen
him at all.

Cheyenne did not know Tom very well, else he would have taken it for
granted that Tom not only had seen him, but had also made a guess at
his reason for shaving in the middle of the week.

Tom walked on, making a mental tally of the girls within riding
distance from camp. Jennie Miller was reported engaged to an AJ man,
and besides, she lived too far away and was not pretty enough to be
worth the effort of a twenty-five mile ride just to hear her play
hymns distressingly on an organ with a chronic squeak in one pedal.
There was Alice Boyle at the AJ, and there was Mary Hope Douglas, who
was growing to be quite a young lady,--pretty good-looking, too, if
she wouldn't peel her hair back so straight and tight. Mary Hope
Douglas, Tom decided, was probably the girl. It struck Tom as
significant that she should be the daughter of the man who mourned the
loss of the yearling. He had not reached the rear of the tent before
he decided that he himself would do a little riding that night. He
caught and saddled Coaley, his own pet saddle horse that had never
carried any man save Tom--never would, so long as Tom had anything to
say about it--and set off toward the Devil's Tooth ranch. Cheyenne
ducked his head under the tent flap when he heard the sound of hoof
beats passing close, saw that it was his boss, noted the direction he
was taking, and heaved a sigh of relief. While he labored with the
knot in his handkerchief which must be tied exactly right before he
would leave the tent, Cheyenne had been composing a reason for leaving
camp. Now he would not need a reason, and he grinned while he
plastered his hair down in a sleek, artistically perfect scallop over
his right eyebrow. Tom was going to the home ranch,--to round up Al,
very likely. He would be gone all night and he would not know how many
of his men rode abroad that night.

So presently Cheyenne saddled the freshest horse in his string and
loped off, making an insulting sign with one hand when the boys wished
him luck with the girl and offered to go along and talk religion with
"feyther" just to help him out.

Very soon after that Sam Pretty Cow drifted away, and no one noticed
his absence. Sam Pretty Cow's wanderings never did attract much
attention. He was Injun, and Injuns have ways strange to white men.
For instance, he did not sleep in the tent, but spread his blankets
under whatever shelter he could find within hailing distance from the
others. He was always around when he was wanted, and that seemed to be
all that was expected of him. Sleep settled on the Devil's Tooth
round-up camp, and the night guard sang to the cattle while they rode
round and round the herd, and never dreamed that this night was not as
other nights had been.




CHAPTER SIX

BELLE MEETS AN EMERGENCY IN HER OWN WAY


A Meadow Lark, his conscience comfortable after a generous breakfast
of big and little worms carried to his mate hidden away under a thick
clump of rabbit weed down by the creek, spread rigid wings and
volplaned to the crooked post beside the corral gate, folded his
feathers snug and tilted his head aslant. _"Cler, cler, cler, cler-ee,
cler-ee!"_ he sang, and perked a wary eye toward the low-roofed
stable.

"Oh, I hear you, you sassy little sinner! I wouldn't think you'd have
the nerve, after what you've done to my radishes. I'm sure going to
mix with you, if you--Rosa! Lift a heel at me and you die! Stand
over--don't you try squeezing me against the wall, or I'll take my
quirt to you! Get over there, before I brain you! Hay-ah-h, you--"

From the sounds one would imagine that a bear, two lions and a mule
had come to handgrips in the stable, and that a woman of the Amazons
was battling with them all. The meadow lark knew better. This was his
second season on the Devil's Tooth ranch, and he knew that Belle
Lorrigan was merely harnessing her pinto team in the stable, and that
nothing out of the ordinary was taking place. Being a wise bird as
well as an inquisitive one, he fluttered up to the ridge-pole of the
roof and from that sanctuary listened beady-eyed to the customary
tumult.

Certain staccato epithets meant merely that Subrosa was objecting to
the crupper. A sudden stamping testified that Belle had approached
Rosa with the bridle. A high-keyed, musical voice chanting man-size
words of an intimidating nature followed which proved that the
harnessing was progressing as well as could be expected. Then came a
lull, and the meadow lark tilted forward expectantly, his head turned
sidewise to see what came next.

First came Belle Lorrigan, walking backward, a shot-loaded quirt
raised admonishingly to the chin of Subrosa who walked stiff-legged
and reluctant, his white-lashed, blue eyes rolling fearsomely, his
nostrils belling in loud snorts of protest. A complexity of
emotions stirred Subrosa. Afraid to lunge forward, hating to walk
circumspectly, eager for the race yet dreading the discipline of rein
and whip, Subrosa yielded perforce to the inevitable. As his heels
flicked over the low doorsill he swung round and landed one final
kick against the log wall, threw up his head in anticipation of the
quirt, stepped on a dragging trace chain and jumped as though it
was a rattler.

"None of that, you cantankerous brute! One of these days I'm going to
just naturally brain you, Sub. I'm getting good and tired of this
circus business. You settle down, now, and act human, or--"

Subrosa kicked at the trace and flipped it up so that it struck him
smartly on the rump. He jumped straight forward at Belle, who dodged
and landed the quirt none too gently on his nose. Subrosa sat down
violently, and Belle straightway kicked him in the paunch by way of
hinting that she preferred him standing. Then they had it out,
rampaging all over the round-pole corral until Belle, breathing a bit
fast but sparkly-eyed and victorious, led Subrosa through the gate and
up to the post where she snubbed him fast. She was turning to go after
Rosa when a young voice called to her anxiously.

"Oh, Mrs. Lorrigan! Quick, I'm in a hurry. I mustn't stay, because
they'll be here in a little while. But they're coming by the road and
I came down the trail, and that gave me time. I can't take any more
music lessons, Mrs. Lorrigan. Father is that angry wi' your
husband--and oh, Mrs. Lorrigan! If you have any hide that isna your
own, ye should hide it away at once! Because the shuriff--"

Belle laid her palms on her hips and stared blankly up at Mary Hope,
who sat nervously on old Rab at the gate.

"Heavens, child! My hide is my own--and at that it's pretty well
hidden. What about the sheriff? What's he got to say about it?"

"It's the stealing, Mrs. Lorrigan. Father has the shuriff wi' him, and
they are going to search the ranch for the hides--"

"Good Lord! _What_ hides?"

"The hides of my father's cattle. And if you have any, put them away
quick, where the shuriff canna find them, Mrs. Lorrigan! It's ill I
should go against my father, but you have been so good to me with the
music lessons, and--"

"Don't let the music lessons bother you, Hope. And I guess we're
entitled to all the cowhides we've got on the place, if that's what
you mean. What do you think we are--thieves, Hope Douglas?"

"I dinna say it. I only came to warn ye, so that you may have time tae
put your hides way oot o' their sicht when they come. I dinna want
that your husband should go to prison, Mrs. Lorrigan. But father is
that angry--"

"Well, say! Let me tell you something, Hope. If there's any talk of
stealing and prison for the Lorrigans, your dad had better keep outa
my Tom's sight. And outa mine," she added grimly. "There'll be no
searching for anything on this ranch when my Tom's not here to see
what goes on. You better go back and tell your dad I said it. If you
don't and he brings the sheriff on here, don't blame me if somebody
gets hurt."

"Oh, but it's the law they're bringing on ye! Ye canna go contrary to
the law!" Mary Hope's voice quavered with fear.

"Oh, can't I!" Belle gave her head a tilt. "You beat it, while the
going's good. I hear voices up on the road. If you don't want your dad
to come and catch you here--"

That settled it. Terror drove Mary Hope into the Devil's Tooth trail
at Rab's best pace, which was a stiff-legged lope. Her last glance
backward showed her Belle Lorrigan taking her six-shooter belt off the
buckboard seat and buckling it around her waist so that the gun hung
well forward. Mary Hope shuddered and struck Rab with the quirt.

Belle had led Rosa from the stable and was cautiously fastening the
neck yoke in place when the sheriff and Aleck Douglas rode around the
corner of the stable. Rosa shied and snorted and reared, and Belle
used the rein-ends for a whiplash until Rosa decided that she would
better submit to authority and keep her hide whole. She stood fairly
quiet after that, with little nipping dance-steps in one spot, while
Belle fastened buckles and snaps and trace chains. Subrosa, having had
his tantrum, contented himself with sundry head-shakings and snorts.
When the team was "hooked up" to Belle's satisfaction, she tied them
both firmly to the corral with short ropes, and finally turned her
attention to her visitors.

"Howdy, Mr. Douglas? Fine day we're having," she greeted the dour
Scotchman amiably.

The sheriff coughed behind his hand, looked sidelong at his companion,
rode a step or two nearer to Belle, swung a leg over the cantle of his
saddle. Perhaps he expected Aleck Douglas to introduce him, but he did
not wait for the formality.

"Mrs. Lorrigan, I'm sheriff of the county," he began ingratiatingly,
when his two feet were on the ground.

"You are?" Belle flashed a row of very white teeth. "You sure don't
look it. I'd have taken you for a regular human being."

"Mr. Douglas, here, would like to take a look at some hides Mr.
Lorrigan has got curing. He thinks possibly--"

"'Tis useless to cover the truth wi' saft words, shuriff," Douglas
interrupted glumly. "'Tis stolen cattle we are tracing, and 'tis here
we wad look for the hides of them. I hae guid reason--"

"You'll find my husband at the round-up. Before you do any searching,
you had better go and have a talk with him. When he's gone strangers
don't go prowling around this ranch."

"We'll have our talk with him after we've taken a look around,"
the sheriff amended, grinning a little. "It's just a matter of
form--nothing you need to object to, one way or the other. I don't
suppose we'll find anything--"

"No, I don't suppose you will. Not unless you find it on the road
back. I hate to seem unfriendly, but I'll just have to ask you to
crawl on your horse and go see Tom about it."

"Now, we don't want any unpleasantness at all, Mrs. Lorrigan. But this
man has swore out a warrant--"

"Shucks! What he does never did interest me one way or the other, and
does not now. I'm telling you there'll be no snooping around here
while Tom's away."

"Oh, well, now!" The sheriff rather prided himself on his ability to
"handle folks peaceable," as he expressed it. He injected a little
more of the oil of persuasiveness into his voice. It was his standard
recipe for avoiding trouble with a woman. "You don't think for a
minute I'd take advantage of his absence, Mrs. Lorrigan? Nothing like
that at all. We just want to see if a certain cowhide is here. If it
isn't, then we won't need to bother Tom at all, maybe. Get down, Mr.
Douglas, and we'll just have a look around. Mrs. Lorrigan ain't going
to make no objections to that."

Belle smiled. "Oh, yes, she is. She's going to do quite a lot of
objecting. You better stay right where you are, Scotty. You're a heap
safer."

The sheriff began to lose patience. "Now, look here, Mrs. Lorrigan!
You're dealing with the law, you know. We can't have any nonsense."

"We won't have," Belle assured him placidly. "That's what I've been
trying to beat into your head. Why, good Lord! Can't you take the hint
and see I'm trying not to have any trouble with yuh? I don't want to
have to _run_ you off the ranch--but as you say, there's not going to
be any nonsense. I said, _go_. I'm waiting to see if you've got sense
enough to do it."

"Sa-ay! Just look here now! Do you know it's a State's prison offense
to resist an officer!" The sheriff's face was growing red.

Belle laughed. "Sure. But I'm not. You--you're irresistible! And I
don't know you're an officer."

This went over the sheriff's head and was wasted, though Aleck Douglas
pulled down his mouth at the corners as though he was afraid he might
smile if he were not careful.

The sheriff took up his bridle reins, preparing to lead his horse over
to a post and tie him. He glanced at Belle and saw that she had a
six-shooter in her hand and a glitter in her eyes. Quite naturally he
hesitated. Then, at a perfectly plain signal from the gun, he turned
his palms toward her at a level with his shoulders.

"You needn't tie up. Crawl into the saddle and drift."

"I've got a search warrant--"

"You can keep it and show it to Tom. And get off this ranch just as
quick as that horse can take you. I'll have you both arrested for
trespassing. I'm not taking your word for anything, you see. _I_ don't
know anything about your warrant--hey, Riley!" This to the cook, who
came, taking steps as long as his legs would let him, and swinging a
damp dishcloth in one moist red hand.

"Riley, here's a man claims he's the sheriff and that he's got a
warrant to search the ranch. I don't believe a word of it, and I've
ordered him off the place. I wouldn't for the world resist an officer
of the law--put your hands up a little higher, Mr. Man!--but when Tom
ain't home no stranger is going to come snooping around here if I can
stop him. Ain't that right, Riley?"

"That's right, Belle," Riley acquiesced, working his oversized Adam's
apple convulsively. (Riley, by the way, would just as readily have
approved of murder if Belle had asked for his approval.)

"Well, you're a witness that I'm from Missouri. I've told this man to
go tell his troubles to Tom. If he's honest he'll do it. If he don't
go in about ten seconds, I'm going to throw a bullet through his hat.
_Then_ if he hangs around, I shall shoot him in his left leg just
about six inches above the knee. I can do it, can't I, Riley?"

"Well, now, you shore can, Belle!" Riley nodded his head emphatically.
"If you say six, I'd shore gamble a year's wages it won't be five,
or seven. Six inches above his knee goes, if you say six."

"All right. I'm just defending the ranch when Tom's gone. You hear me,
Mr. Man. Now, you git!"

The sheriff turned and opened his mouth to protest, and Belle shot the
promised bullet through his hat crown. The sheriff ducked and made a
wild scramble for the stirrup.

"Open your mouth again and I'll be awfully tempted to shoot that
crooked tooth out of it," Belle observed. "And in ten seconds,
remember, you're going to get--"

The sheriff still had two of the ten seconds to spare when he left,
Aleck Douglas following him glumly.

"It's him, all right. It's the sheriff, Belle," Riley informed her,
while they watched the two clatter up the road to where the real grade
began. "What's eatin' on 'em? Likely he did have a search warrant."

"He can use it, after I'm through. Old Scotty is trailing some rustled
stock, they claim. They came here looking for hides. You keep an eye
out, Riley, and see if they keep going. I guess they will--they'll go
after Tom. I'm going to have a look at those cowhides in the old
shed."

"Better let me," Riley offered. "It ain't any job for a woman nohow.
You watch the trail and I'll look."

Belle would not even consider the proposition. The Lorrigan reputation
never had troubled her much,--but it sent her now to the shed where
hides were kept stored until the hide buyer made his next annual visit
through the country. She did not believe that she would find any brand
save the various combinations of the NL monogram, but she meant to
make sure before any stranger was given access to the place.

The _job_ was neither easy nor pleasant, but she did it thoroughly.
Riley, roosting meditatively on the top rail of the corral where he
could watch the road down the bluff, craned his long neck inquiringly
toward her when she returned.

"Nothing but NL stuff, just as I thought," said Belle, holding her
hands as far away from her face as possible. "I knew Tom wouldn't have
any stolen hides on the place--but it was best to make sure."

"No ma'am, he wouldn't. I'm shore surprised they'd come and try to
find any. Looks bad to me, Belle. Looks to me like somebody is shore
tryin' to start somethin'. There's plenty in the Black Rim would like
to see Tom railroaded to the pen--plenty. Looks to me like they're
aimin' to pin something on him. No, sir, I don't like it. Uh course,"
he went on, letting himself loose-jointedly to the ground, "they
couldn't get nothing on Tom--not unless they framed something. But I
wouldn't put it a-past 'em to do it. No, ma'am, I wouldn't."

"Your bread's burning, Riley. I can smell it. Don't you never think
they'll frame on Tom. They may try it--but that's as far as they'll
get. They don't want to start anything with the Lorrigans!"

"Well, I left the oven door open. She ain't burning to hurt. Yuh see,
Scotty Douglas, he's religious and he don't never pack a gun. Them
kind's bad to tangle up with; awful bad. There ain't nothing much a
man can do with them religious birds. Them not being armed, you can't
shoot--it's murder. And that kinda ties a man's hands, as yuh might
say. They always take advantage of it, invariable. No, ma'am, it looks
bad."

"It'll look worse--for them that tries any funny business with this
outfit," Belle assured him. "Go along and 'tend to your baking. You
know I hate burnt bread. I'm going to drive over and see what they're
up to."

She untied Rosa and Subrosa, and because she was in a hurry she
permitted Riley to hold them by the bits while she climbed in, got the
lines firmly in one hand and her blacksnake in the other. Not often
did she deign to accept assistance, and Riley was all aquiver with
gratified vanity at this mark of her favor.

"Turn 'em loose--and get to that bread!" she cried, and circled the
pintos into the road. "You, Sub! Cut that out, now--settle down! Rosa!
Stead-dy, I ain't any Ben Hur pulling off a chariot race, remember!"

At a gallop they took the first sandy slope of the climb, and Belle
let them go. They were tough--many's the time they had hit the level
on top of the ridge without slowing to a walk on the way up. They had
no great load to pull, and if it pleased them to lope instead of trot,
Belle would never object.

As she sat jouncing on the seat of a buckboard with rattly spokes in
all of the four wheels and a splintered dashboard where Subrosa landed
his heels one day when he had backed before he kicked, one felt that
she would have made a magnificent charioteer. Before she had gone half
a mile her hair was down and whipping behind her like a golden
pennant. Her big range hat would have gone sailing had it not been
tied under her chin with buckskin strings. Usually she sang as she
hurtled through space, but to-day the pintos missed her voice.

Five miles out on the range she overtook the sheriff and Aleck Douglas
riding to the round-up. Aleck Douglas seldom rode faster than a
jogging trot, and the sheriff was not particularly eager for his
encounter with Tom Lorrigan. For that matter, no sheriff had ever been
eager to encounter a Lorrigan. The Lorrigan family had always been
counted a hazard in the office of the sheriff, though of a truth the
present generation had remained quiescent so far and the law had not
heretofore reached its arm toward them.

The two men looked back, saw Belle coming and parted to let her pass.
Belle yelled to her team and went by with never a glance toward
either, and the two stared after her without a word until she had
jounced down into a shallow draw and up the other side, the pintos
never slowing their lope.

"Well, I'm darned!" ejaculated the sheriff. His name, by the way, was
Perry. "I've heard tell of Belle Lorrigan drivin' hell-whoopin' over
the country with a team of bronks, but I kinda thought they was
stretching the truth. I guess not, though, if that's a sample."

"The woman hersel' is no so bad. 'Tis the men folk that are black wi'
sin. Drinkin', swearin', gamblin' thieves they be, and 'tis well they
should be taught a lesson." The Douglas head wagged self-righteously.

"Maybe it would be a good idea to go back and search the ranch now,
while she's gone." The sheriff pulled up, considering. "I didn't want
any trouble with her; I never do quarrel with a woman if I can get
around it any way. She's a holy terror. I guess I'll just ride back
and take a look at them hides."

Aleck Douglas eyed him sardonically, thinking perhaps of the
black-edged bullet hole that showed plainly in the sheriff's
hat-crown.

"'Tis a deal safer wi' the woman oot of the way," he agreed drily.

The sheriff nodded and turned back.




CHAPTER SEVEN

THE NAME


Tom Lorrigan may have seen bigger fusses made over smaller matters
than the hide of a spotty yearlin', but his boys never had.

No country is so isolated that gossip cannot find it out. The story of
the spotted yearling went speeding through the country. Men made thin
excuses to ride miles out of their way that they might air their
opinions and hear some fresh bit of news, some conjecture that grew to
a rumor and was finally repeated broadcast as truth. Children cringed
and wept while necks were scrubbed relentlessly, for a fever of
"visiting" attacked the women of the range. Miles they would travel to
visit a neighbor. And there they talked and talked and talked, while
the guest in neighborly fashion dried the dinner dishes for the
hostess in hot, fly-infested kitchens.

Aleck Douglas, infuriated by the contemptuous attitude which Tom had
taken toward him and his spotty yearling, and by his failure to find
any incriminating evidence on the Devil's Tooth ranch, swore to a
good many suspicions which he called facts, and had Tom arrested. The
sheriff had taken two deputies along with him, because he fully
expected that the Lorrigans would "go on the warpath" as Belle had
done. He was vastly astonished and somewhat chagrined when Tom gave a
snort, handed over his gun, and turned to one of his boys.

"Al," said Tom, "you go ahead with the round-up while I go in and fix
this up. May take a few days--depends on the gait I can get 'em to
travel. I'll have to rustle me a lawyer, too. But you know what to do;
keep 'er moving till I get back."

Black Rim country talked and chortled and surmised, and wondered what
made Tom so darned meek about it. They did not accuse him of any lack
of nerve; being a Lorrigan, his nerve could scarcely be questioned.
Opinion was about evenly divided. A few declared that Tom had
something up his sleeve, and there would be a killing yet. Others
insisted that Tom knew when he was backed into a corner. Old Scotty
Douglas had him dead to rights, they said, and Tom knew better than to
run on the rope. Men and women assumed the gift of prophecy, and all
prophesied alike. Tom Lorrigan would go "over the road"; for how long
they could only guess according to their secret hopes. Some predicted
a fifteen-year term for Tom. Others thought that he might get off
lightly--say with five or six years. They based their opinion on the
fact that men have been sent to the penitentiary for fifteen years,
there to repent of stealing a calf not yet past the age of prime veal.
And it is not so long since men were hanged for stealing a horse;
witness Tom's brother, who would surely have been lynched had he not
been shot. Witness also divers other Lorrigans whose careers had been
shortened by their misdeeds.

Much of the talk was peddled to Tom and the boys under the guise of
friendship. Having lived all of his life in the Black Rim country, Tom
knew how much the friendship was worth, knew that the Black Rim folk
had drawn together like a wolf pack, and were waiting only until he
was down before they rushed in to rend him and his family. Old grudges
were brought out and aired secretly. It would go hard with the
Lorrigan family if Tom were found guilty. Although he sensed the
covert malice behind the smiles men gave him, he would not yield one
inch from his mocking disparagement of the whole affair. He laid down
a law or two to his boys, and bade them hold their tongues and go
their way and give no heed to the clacking.

"The show ain't over till the curtain's down for good," he said,
borrowing a phrase from Belle. "We got a long time yet to live in the
Black Rim. We'll be right here when the smoke lifts. Hang and rattle
now, and keep your mouths shut. This here's the law-sharp's job. I'm
payin' him darn good money for it, too. When he's through, then we'll
play. But mark this down in yore little red book, boys: The less yuh
say right now, the stronger we can play the game when we're ready."

"If they do railroad yuh, dad, leave it to us. They'll be a sorry
looking bunch when we're through," said Lance, and meant every word of
it.

"They won't railroad me." Tom snorted and laughed his contempt of the
whole affair. "I ain't ever used the law to fight with before--but
shucks! When a scrap gets outside of gun range, one club's about the
same as another to me."

Optimism is a good thing, but it does not altogether serve, as Tom
discovered at the trial.

Evidence was produced which astonished him. For instance, an AJ man
had seen him riding over by Squaw Butte, on the night after Douglas
had accused him of stealing the spotted yearling. The AJ man seemed
embarrassed at his sudden prominence in the case, and kept turning his
big range hat round and round on one knee as he sat in the chair
sacred to those who bore witness to the guilt or innocence of their
fellow men in Black Rim country. He did not often look up, and when he
did he swallowed convulsively, as though something stuck in his
throat. But his story sounded matter-of-fact and honest.

He had ridden past Squaw Butte the night after Tom Lorrigan was
accused by Douglas. Yes, he knew it was that night, because next day
he heard about the fuss over at Devil's Tooth. He had been on his way
from Jumpoff and had cut across country because he was late. There was
a moon, and he had seen a man riding across an open space between the
creek and the willows. The man had gone in among the willows. The AJ
man had not thought much about it, though he did wonder a little, too.
It was late for a man to be riding around on the range.

When he reached the place, he saw a man ride out of the brush farther
along, into clear moonlight. It was Tom Lorrigan; yes, he was sure of
that. He knew the horse that Tom was riding. It was a big, shiny black
that always carried its head up; a high-stepping horse that a man
could recognize anywhere. No, he didn't know of any other horse in the
country just like it. He admitted that if he hadn't been sure of the
horse he would not have been sure it was Tom. He did not think Tom saw
him at all. He was riding along next the bank, in the shadow. He had
gone on home, and the next day he heard that Scotty Douglas claimed
the Lorrigans had rustled a yearling from him.

Later, Tom's lawyer asked him why he had not spoken to Tom. The AJ man
replied that he didn't know--he wasn't very close; not close enough
for talking unless he hollered.

That was all very well, and Black Rim perked its ears, thinking that
the case looked bad for Tom. Very bad indeed.

But Tom's lawyer proved very adroitly that the AJ man had not been in
Jumpoff at the time he claimed. He had been with his own outfit, and
if he had ridden past Squaw Butte that night he must have gone out
from the ranch and come back again. Which led very naturally to the
question, Why?

On the other hand, why had Tom Lorrigan ridden to Squaw Butte that
night? He himself explained that later on. He said that he had gone
over to see if there was any hide in the willows as Douglas had
claimed. He had not found any.

Thus two men admitted having been in the neighborhood of the stolen
hide on that night. Tom's lawyer was quick to seize the coincidence,
and make the most of it. Why, he asked mildly, might not the AJ outfit
have stolen the yearling? What was the AJ man doing there? Why not
suspect him of having placed the hide in the crevice where it had
later been found? That night the hide had been removed from the
willows where Douglas had first discovered it. Douglas had gone back
the next day after it, and it had been missing. It was not until
several days later that he had found it in the crevice. Why assume
that Tom Lorrigan had removed it?

"If I'd set out to cache that hide," Tom here interposed, "I'd have
buried it. Only a darn fool would leave evidence like that laying
around in sight."

For this the court reprimanded him, but he had seen several of the
jury nod their heads, unconsciously agreeing with him. And although
his remark was never put on record, it stuck deep in the minds of the
jury and had its influence later on. They remembered that the
Lorrigans were no fools, and they considered the attempt at concealing
the hide a foolish one--not to say childish.

Tom's lawyer did not argue openly that a conspiracy had been hatched
against Tom Lorrigan, but he so presented the case in his closing
argument to the jury that each man believed he saw an angle to the
affair which the defense had overlooked. It appeared to the jury to be
a "frame-up." For instance, why had Cheyenne, a Lorrigan man, ridden
over to the Douglas ranch and remained outside by the corral for a
long time, talking with Aleck Douglas, before he went inside to call
on the Douglas girl? Sam Pretty Cow impassively testified to that. He
had been riding over to see a halfbreed girl that worked for the
Blacks, and he had cut through the Douglas ranch to save time. He saw
Cheyenne's horse at the corral.

"Me, I dunno what she's doin' on that place. Cheyenne, he's in camp
when I'm go. I'm stop by the haystack. I'm see Cheyenne talk to
Scotty. That don't look good, you bet."

A full week the trial lasted, while the lawyers wrangled over evidence
and technicalities, and the judge ruled out evidence and later ruled
it in again. A full week Tom slept in the county jail,--and for all
their bad reputation, it was the first time a Lorrigan had lain down
behind a bolted door to sleep, had opened his eyes to see the dawn
light painting the wall with the shadow of bars.

There were nights when his optimism failed him, when Tom lay awake
trying to adjust himself to the harrying thought that long, caged
years might be his portion. Nights when he doubted the skill of his
"law-sharp" to free him from the deadweight of the Lorrigan reputation
and the malice of his neighbors. Of course, he would fight--to the
last dollar; but there were nights when he doubted the power of his
dollars to save him.

It was during those nights that the lawless blood of the Lorrigans ran
swiftly through the veins of Tom, who had set himself to win a million
honestly. It was then that he remembered his quiet, law-abiding years
regretfully, as time wasted; a thankless struggle toward the regard of
his fellow men. Of what avail to plod along the path of uprightness
when no man would point to him and say, "There is an honest man."

"They've give me the name, and I ain't got the game," cried Tom
bitterly, in the quiet of his cell. "Whether I go to the pen or
whether I don't, they better stand from under. They'll sure know a
Lorrigan's livin' in the Black Rim before I'm done."




CHAPTER EIGHT

THE GAME


At the long table in the living room of the Devil's Tooth ranch Tom
Lorrigan sat and sharpened an indelible pencil with the razor-edged
small blade of his jackknife. On the open space which Tom had cleared
with the sweep of his arm, a large-sized tablet of glazed and ruled
paper, with George Washington pictured in red and blue and buff on the
cover, received the wood parings from the pencil. It may have been
significant that Tom was careful in his work and made the pencil very
sharp.

Across the room, Belle swung around on the piano stool and looked at
him. "Honey, if you're going to make out the order to Montgomery,
Ward, I'd like to send on for some more music. I've been going over
that new list--"

"I ain't," said Tom, removing his cigarette from the corner of his
mouth and blowing the tiny, blue-painted shavings off George
Washington's face. "You go ahead and make out the order yourself."

Belle eyed the pencil-sharpening and sent a keen glance at Tom's face.
"Well, honey, from the way you're squaring up to that tablet, I
thought you was going to send on for a new buckboard and mower."

Tom bent his head and blew again, gave George a sardonic grin and
turned him face-down on the table, so that the ruled paper lay ready
to his hand.

"Right now I'm going to figure up what that dang spotty yearlin' of
old Scotty's cost me," he stated grimly. "And there's some other Black
Rimmers I've got a bill against."

"Hope you don't try holding your breath till you collect," Belle
retorted. "Honey, you'd best leave the Black Rimmers alone. I feel as
if we'd had enough excitement enough for a while. I wouldn't start
anything more right now, if I was you. Every last one of them is ready
to jump on your neck--and the Lord only knows why, unless it's because
you _didn't_ steal that darned spotted yearling! Some folks sure do
love to see the other fellow up to his eyebrows in trouble. They were
sitting there in that courtroom just _wishing_ you would be sent up. I
saw it in their faces, Tom. And that old rock-hearted Scotchman looked
as if he's just lost two bits when the jury said 'Not guilty.'"

"Mh-m--hm-m--that's what I'm figuring on now," said Tom, and bent to
his problem. "My old dad woulda gone out and shot up a few, but times
are changed and we're all getting so damn civilized we've got to stack
the cards or quit the game. Belle, what do you reckon it's worth to a
man to be hauled into court and called a cow thief?"

Belle's lips pressed together. "I don't know, Tom--but I know what it
would have cost 'em if they had sent you over the road. I had a gun on
me, and when that jury foreman stood up to give the verdict, it was
looking him in the eye through a buttonhole in my coat. Him and
Cheyenne and old Scotty and two or three more would sure have got
theirs, if he hadn't said, 'Not guilty.'"

"Lord bless yuh, I knew it all the time. Next time we go to court
you'll leave the artillery at home, old girl. I like to got heart
failure there for a minute, till I seen you ease down and lay your
hand in your lap." He looked at her and laughed a little. "I've got a
bill of damages against several of the folks around here, but I ain't
fool enough to try and collect with a six-gun."

He settled himself to his task, writing at the top of the page the
name of Aleck Douglas and after that "Dr." A full page he covered with
items set against the names of various neighbors. When he had finished
he folded the paper neatly and put it away with other important
memoranda, picked up his big gray Stetson and went over to kiss Belle
full on her red lips, and to smooth her hair, with a reassuring pat
on her plump shoulder as a final caress.

"Don't you worry none about the Black Rimmers," he said, "and don't
you worry about me. I've got to ride high, wide and handsome now to
make up the time and money I lost on account of the spotty yearlin',
and maybe I won't be home so much. But I ain't quarreling with my
neighbors, nor getting into any kind of ruckus whatever."

With the stilted, slightly stiff-legged gait born of long hours in the
saddle and of high-heeled riding boots, he walked unhurriedly to the
corral where the boys were just driving in a herd of horses.

Few of them showed saddle marks, all of them snorted and tossed
untrimmed manes and tails as they clattered against the stout poles,
circling the big corral in a cloud of dust and a thunder of hoof
beats. Pulling his hat down over his black brows to secure it against
the wind, Tom climbed the corral fence and straddled the top rail that
he might scan the herd.

"Pretty good-looking bunch, dad," said Al, reining up beside Tom. "We
had to ride some to get 'em in--they're sure snuffy. What you going to
do with 'em? Break out a few?"

"Some. Did yuh take notice, Al, that Coaley come within an ace of
sending me over the road? That there AJ man swore to the horse when he
wouldn't never have swore to me, but they all took it as a cinch it
was me he saw, because nobody else ever rides Coaley. And by the Lord
John, Al, that's the last time any man's going to swear to me in the
dark by the horse I'm ridin'. The Devil's Tooth outfit is going to
have a lot more saddle horses broke gentle than what they've got now.
And just between me and you, Al, any more night-ridin' that's done in
this outfit ain't going to be done on cayuses that can be told a mile
off on a dark night!"

"You're durn tootin', dad." Al grinned while he moistened the edge of
his rolled cigarette. "I thought at the time that Coaley was liable to
be a damn expensive horse for you to be ridin'." His eyes traveled
over the restless herd, singling out this horse and that for brief
study. "There's some right speedy stuff in that bunch," he said.
"They've got the look of stayers, some of 'em. Take that there bay
over there by the post: He's got a chest on him like a lion--and look
at them legs! There'd be a good horse for you, dad."

"One, maybe." Tom spat into the dust and, impelled by Al's example,
drew his own cigarette papers from his shirt pocket. "I'm thinkin' of
breakin' all we've got time for this summer. Darn this here makin' one
horse your trademark!"

Up at the house, Riley appeared in the kitchen doorway and gave a long
halloo while he wiped his big freckled hand on his flour-sack apron.
"Hoo-ee! Come an' git it!" He waited a moment, until he saw riders
dismounting and leading their horses into the little corral. Then he
turned back to pour the coffee into the big, thick, white cups
standing in single file around the long oil-cloth-covered table in the
end of the kitchen nearest the side door where the boys would
presently come trooping in to slide loose-jointedly into their places
on the long, shiny benches.

Tom pinched out the blaze of his match and threw one long leg back
over the corral fence. His glance went to the riders beyond the big
corral.

"Where's Lance at!" he called to Al, who was riding around to the
little corral.

"You can search me. He quit us when we got the horses into the corral,
and rode off up the Slide trail. If I was to make a guess, I would say
that he went to meet Mary Hope. They been doing that right frequent
ever since she quit coming here. 'Tain't no skin off my nose--but
Lance, he's buildin' himself a mess uh trouble with old Scotty, sure
as you're a foot high."

"Darn fool kid--let the old folks git to scrappin' amongst themselves,
and the young ones start the lovemakin'! I never knowed it to fail;
but you can skin me for a coyote if I know what makes 'em do it."
Grumbling to himself, Tom climbed down and followed Al. "You can
tell Riley I'll be late to dinner," he said, when he had come up
to where Al was pulling the saddle off his horse. "I ain't much
on buttin' into other folks' love affairs, but I reckon it maybe
might be a good idea to throw a scare into them two. I'm plumb sick
of Scotch--wouldn't take it in a highball right now if you was to
shove one under my nose!"

Al laughed, looking over his shoulder at Tom while he loosened the
latigo. "If you can throw a scare into Lance, you sure are a dinger,"
he bantered. "That youth is some heady."

"Looks to me like it runs in the family," Tom retorted. "You're some
heady yourself, if you ever took notice. And I don't give a damn how
heady any of you kids are; you can't run any rannies on your dad, and
you want to put that down in your little red book so you won't forgit
it!"

He led Coaley from the stable, mounted and rode away up the Slide
trail, more than half ashamed of his errand. To interfere in a love
affair went against the grain, but to let a Lorrigan make love to a
Douglas on the heels of the trial was a pill so bitter that he refused
to swallow it.

He urged Coaley up the trail, his eyes somber with resentment whenever
he saw the fresh hoofprints of Lance's horse in the sandy places. Of
the three boys, Lance was his favorite, and it hurt him to think that
Lance had so little of the Lorrigan pride that he would ride a foot
out of his way to speak to any one of the Douglas blood.

Up the Slide went Coaley, his head held proudly erect upon his high,
arched neck, his feet choosing daintily the little rough places in the
rock where long experience had taught him he would not slip. Big as
Tom was, Coaley carried him easily and reached the top without so much
as a flutter in the flanks to show that the climb had cost him an
effort.

"It's a dang darn shame I got to straddle strange horses just because
there ain't another in the country like you, Coaley," he muttered,
leaning forward to smooth the silky hide under the crinkly mane. "It's
going to set hard, now I'm tellin' yuh, to throw my saddle on some
plain, ordinary cayuse. But it's a bet I can't afford to overlook;
they made that plain enough."

Coaley pricked up his ears and looked, his big, bright eyes taking in
the shadow of a horse beside a clump of wild currant bushes that grew
in the very base of the Devil's Tooth. Tom grunted and rode over that
way, Coaley walking slowly, his knees bending springily like a dancer
feeling out his muscles.

Lance stood with his back toward them. His hat was pushed far back on
his head, and he was looking at Mary Hope, who leaned against the rock
and stared down into the valley below. Her hair, Tom observed, was not
"slicked back" to-day. It had been curled a little, probably on rags
twisted in after she had gone to bed and taken out before she arose in
the morning, lest her mother discover her frivolity and lecture her
long,--and, worse still, make her wet a comb and take all of the curl
out. A loose strand blew across her tanned cheek, so that she reached
up absently and tucked it behind her ear, where it would not stay for
longer than a minute.

"I am sure I didna know you would be here," she said, without taking
her eyes off the valley. "It is a view I like better than most, and I
have a right to ride where I please. And I have no wish to ride out of
my way to be friends with any one that tried to make my father out a
liar and an unjust man. He may be hard, but he is honest. And that is
more than some--"

"More than some can say--us Lorrigans, for instance!"

"I didna say that, but if the coat fits, you can put it on."

Mary Hope bit her lip and lashed a weed with her quirt. "All of this
is none of my doing," she added, with a dullness in her voice that may
have meant either regret or resentment. "You hate my father, and you
are mad because I canna side with you and hate him too. I am sorry the
trouble came up, but I canna see how you expect me to go on coming to
see your mither when you know my father would never permit it."

"You say that like you were speaking a piece. How long did you lay
awake last night, making it up? You can't make me swallow that,
anyway. Your father never permitted you to come in the first place,
and you know it. You made believe that old skate ran away with you
down the trail, and that you couldn't stop him. You've been coming
over to our place ever since, and you never asked old Scotty whether
he would permit it or not. I'm not saying anything about myself, but
it hurts Belle to have you throw her down right now. Under the
circumstances it makes her feel as if you thought we were thieves and
stole your dad's yearling."

"I'm not saying anything like that."

"Maybe you're not, but you sure are acting it. If you don't think
that, why don't you go on taking music lessons from Belle? What made
you stop, all of a sudden?"

"That," said Mary Hope stiffly, "is my own affair, Lance Lorrigan."

"It's mine, let me tell you. It's mine, because it hits Belle; and
what hits her hits me. If you think she isn't good enough for you to
visit, why in thunder have you been coming all this while? She isn't
any worse than she was two months ago, is she?"

"I'm not saying that she is."

"Well, you're acting it, and that's a darn sight worse."

"You ought to know that with all this trouble between your father and
my father--"

"Well, can you tell me when they ever did have any truck together?
Your father doesn't hate our outfit a darn bit worse than he ever
did. He found a chance to knife us, that's all. It isn't that he never
wanted to before."

"I'll thank you, Lance Lorrigan, not to accuse my father of knifing
anybody. He's my father and--"

"And that isn't anything to brag about, if you ask me. I'd rather have
my father doing time for stealing, than have him a darned, hide-bound
old hypocrite that will lie a man into the pen, and then go around and
pull a long face and call himself a Christian!"

"My father doesna lie! And he is not a hypocrite either. If your
father was half as--" She stopped abruptly, her face going red when
she saw Tom sitting on his horse beyond the shoulder of rock,
regarding her with that inscrutable smile which never had failed to
make her squirm mentally and wonder what he thought of her. She stood
up, trembling a little.

Lance turned slowly and met Tom's eyes without flinching. "Hello," he
said, on guard against the two of them, wondering what had brought his
dad to this particular point at this particular time.

"Hello. How d'yuh do, Miss Douglas? Lance, dinner's getting cold
waiting for you." Tom lifted his hat to Mary Hope, turned, and rode
back whence he had come, never glancing over his shoulder but
nevertheless keenly alert for the sound of voices.

He was not quite through the Slide when he heard the hoof beats of
Lance's horse come clicking down over the rocks. Tom smiled to himself
as he rode on, never looking back.




CHAPTER NINE

A LITTLE SCOTCH


In the Black Rim country March is a month of raw winds and cold rains,
with sleet and snow and storm clouds tumbling high in the West and
spreading to the East, where they hang lowering at the earth and then
return to empty their burden of moisture upon the shrinking live
things below.

In the thinly settled places March is also the time when children go
shivering to school, harried by weather that has lost a little of its
deadliness. In January and February their lives would not be safe from
sudden blizzards, but by the middle of March they may venture forth
upon the quest of learning.

Black Rim country was at best but scantily supplied with schools, and
on the Devil's Tooth range seven young Americans--three of them
adopted from Sweden--were in danger of growing up in deplorable
ignorance of what learning lies hidden in books. A twelve-mile stretch
of country had neither schoolhouse, teacher nor school officers
empowered to establish a school. Until the Swedish family moved into a
shack on the AJ ranch there had not been children enough to make a
teacher worth while. But the Swedish family thirsted for knowledge of
the English language, and their lamenting awoke the father of four
purely range-bred products to a sense of duty toward his offspring.

Wherefore Mary Hope Douglas, home from two winters in Pocatello, where
she had lived with a cousin twice removed and had gone to school and
had learned much, was one day invited to teach a school in the Devil's
Tooth neighborhood.

True, there was no schoolhouse, but there was a deserted old shack on
the road to Jumpoff. A few benches and a stove and table would
transform it into a seat of learning, and there were an old shed and
corral where the pupils might keep their saddle horses during school
hours. She would be paid five dollars a month per head, Jim Boyle of
the AJ further explained. Seven "heads" at five dollars each would
amount to thirty-five dollars a month, and Mary Hope felt her heart
jump at the prospect of earning so much money of her own. Moreover, to
teach school had long been her secret ambition, the solid foundation
of many an air castle. She forthwith consented to become the very
first school-teacher in the Devil's Tooth neighborhood, which hoped
some day to become a real school district.

She would have to ride five miles every morning and evening, and her
morning ride would carry her five miles nearer the Lorrigan ranch,
two of them along their direct trail to Jumpoff. Mary Hope would never
admit to herself that this small detail interested her, but she
thought of it the moment Jim Boyle suggested the old Whipple shack as
a schoolhouse.

Tom Lorrigan, riding home from Jumpoff after two days spent in Lava,
pulled his horse down to a walk and then stopped him in the trail
while he stared hard at the Whipple shack. Five horses walked uneasily
around inside the corral, manes and tails whipping in the gale that
blew cold from out the north. From the bent stovepipe of the shack a
wisp of smoke was caught and bandied here and there above the
pole-and-dirt roof. It seemed incredible to Tom that squatters could
have come in and taken possession of the place in his short absence,
but there was no other explanation that seemed at all reasonable.

Squatters were not welcome on the Devil's Tooth range. Tom rode up to
the shack, dismounted and let Coaley's reins drop to the ground. He
hesitated a minute before the door, in doubt as to the necessity for
knocking. Then his knuckles struck the loose panel twice, and he heard
the sound of footsteps. Tom pulled his hat down tighter on his
forehead and waited.

When Mary Hope Douglas pulled open the door, astonishment held them
both dumb. He had not seen the girl for more than a year,--he was not
certain at first that it was she. But there was no mistaking those
eyes of hers, Scotch blue and uncompromisingly direct in their gaze.
Tom pulled loose and lifted the hat that he had just tightened, and as
she backed from the doorway he entered the shack without quite knowing
why he should do so. Comprehensively he surveyed the mean little room,
bare of everything save three benches with crude shelves before them,
a kitchen table and a yellow-painted chair with two-thirds of the
paint worn off under the incessant scrubbing of mother Douglas. The
three Swedes, their rusty overcoats buttoned to their necks, goggled
at him round-eyed over the tops of their new spelling books, then
ducked and grinned at one another. The four Boyle children, also
bundled in wraps, exchanged sidelong glances and pulled themselves up
alert and expectant in their seats.

"School, eh?" Tom observed, turning as Mary Hope pushed the door shut
against the wind that rattled the small shack and came toward him
shivering and pulling her sweater collar closer about her neck. "When
did this happen?"

"When I started teaching here, Mr. Lorrigan." Then, mindful of her
manners, she tempered the pertness with a smile. "And that was
yesterday. Will you sit down?"

"No, thanks--I just stopped to see who was livin' here, and--" He
broke off to look up at the dirt roof. A clod the size of his fist had
been loosened by the shaking of the wind, and plumped down in the
middle of the teacher's desk. With the edge of his palm he swept clod
and surrounding small particles of dirt into his hat crown, and
carried them to the door.

"There's an empty calf shed over at the ranch that would make a better
schoolhouse than this," he observed. "It's got a shingle roof."

Mary Hope was picking small lumps of dirt out of her hair, which she
wore in a pompadour that disclosed a very nice forehead. "I just love
a roof with shingles on it," she smiled.

"H'm." Tom looked up at the sagging poles with the caked mud showing
in the cracks between where the poles had shrunken and warped under
the weight. A fresh gust of wind rattled dust into his eyes, and the
oldest Swede chortled an abrupt "Ka-hugh!" that set the other six
tittering.

"Silence! _Shame_ on you!" Mary Hope reproved them sternly, rapping on
the kitchen table with a foot rule of some soft wood that blazoned
along its length the name of a Pocatello hardware store. "Get to work
this instant or I shall be compelled to keep you all in at recess."

"You better haze 'em all home at recess, and get where it's warm
before you catch your death of cold," Tom advised, giving first aid to
his eye with a corner of his white-dotted blue handkerchief. "This
ain't fit for cattle, such a day as this."

"A north wind like this would blow through anything," Mary Hope
loyally defended the shack. "It was quite comfortable yesterday."

"I wouldn't send a dog here to school," said Tom. "Can't they dig up
any better place than this for you to teach in?"

"The parents of these children are paying out of their own pockets to
have them taught, as it is."

"They'll be paying out of their own pockets to have them planted, if
they ain't careful," Tom predicted dryly. "How're you fixed for
firewood? Got enough to keep warm on a hot day?"

Mary Hope smiled faintly. "Mr. Boyle hauled us a load of sage brush,
and the boys chop wood mornings and noons--it's a punishment when they
don't behave, or if they miss their lessons. But--the stove doesn't
seem to draw very well, in this wind. It smokes more than it throws
out heat." She added hastily, "It drew all right yesterday. It's this
wind."

"What you going to do if this wind keeps up? It's liable to blow for a
week or two, this time of year."

"Why--we'll manage to get along all right. They'd probably be out
playing in it anyway, if they weren't in school."

"Oh. And what about you?" Tom looked at her, blinking rapidly with his
left eye that was growing bloodshot and watery.

"I? Why, I've lived here all my life, and I ought to be used to a
little bad weather."

"Hunh." Tom shivered in the draught. "So have I lived here all my
life; but I'll be darned if I would want to sit in this shack all day,
the way the wind whistles through it."

"You might do it, though--if it was your only way of earning money,"
Mary Hope suggested shrewdly.

"Well, I might," Tom admitted, "but I sure would stop up a few
cracks."

"We've hardly got settled yet," said Mary Hope. "I intend to stuff the
cracks with rags just as soon as possible. Is your eye still paining?
That dirt is miserable stuff to stick in a person's eye. Shall I try
and get it out? Yesterday I got some in mine, and I had an awful
time."

She dismissed the children primly, with a self-conscious dignity and
some chagrin at their boorish clatter, their absolute ignorance of
discipline. "I shall ring the bell in ten minutes," she told them
while they scuffled to the door. "I shall give you two minutes after
the bell rings to get into your seats and be prepared for duty. Every
minute after that must be made up after school."

"Ay skoll go home now, sen you skoll not keep me by school from tan
minootes," the oldest of the Swedes stopped long enough to bellow at
her from the doorway. "Ole og Helge skoll go med. Ve got long way from
school, og ve don't be by dark ven ve come by home!"

He seized the square tobacco boxes, originally made to hold a pound
of "plug cut," and afterwards dedicated to whatever use a ranch man
might choose to put them. Where schools flourished, the tobacco boxes
were used for lunch. The Swedes carried three tied in flour sacks and
fastened to the saddles. The wind carried them at a run to the corral.
The two smaller boys, Ole and Helge, rode, one behind the other, on
one horse, a flea-bitten gray with an enlarged knee and a habit of
traveling with its neck craned to the left. Christian, the leader of
the revolt, considered himself well-mounted on a pot-bellied bay that
could still be used to round up cattle, if the drive was not more than
a couple of miles. Looking after them from the window that faced the
corral, Tom could not wonder that they were anxious to start early.

"You better let the rest go, too," he advised the perturbed teacher,
looking out at the four Boyle children huddled in the shelter of the
shack, the skirts of the girl whipping in the wind like a pillowslip
on a clothesline in a gale. "There ain't any sense trying to teach
school in a place like this, in such weather. Don't you know them kids
have got all of twelve miles to ride, facing this wind most of the
way? And you've got to ride five miles; and when the sun drops it's
going to be raw enough to put icicles on your ribs under the skin.
Tell 'em to go home. Pore little devils, I wouldn't ask a cow-critter
to face this wind after sundown."

"You do not understand that I must have discipline in this school, Mr.
Lorrigan. To-morrow I shall have to punish those Swedes for leaving
school without permission. I shall make an example of Christian, for
his impudence. I do not think he will want to disobey me again, very
soon!" Mary Hope took her handkerchief from her pocket, refusing to
consider for one moment the significance of its flapping in the wind
while the windows and doors were closed.

"You're just plain stubborn," Tom said bluntly. "You've no business
hanging out in a place like this!"

"I've the business of teaching school, Mr. Lorrigan. I suppose that is
as important to me as your business is to you. And I can't permit my
pupils to rebel against my authority. You would not let your men
dictate to you, would you?"

"They would have a right to call for their time if I asked them to do
some damfool thing like sitting in this shack with the wind blowing
through it at forty miles an hour."

"I am sorry, Mr. Lorrigan, that I must remind you that gentlemen do
not indulge in profanity before a lady."

"Oh, hell! What have I said that was outa the way? I wasn't cussing; I
was telling you what your father and mother ought to tell you, and
what they would if they didn't think more of a few dollars than they
do of their kid's health. But I don't reckon it's my put-in; only
it's any man's business to see that women and kids don't freeze to
death. And by the humpin' hyenas--"

With her lips in a straight line, her eyes very hard and bright and
with a consciousness of heaping coals of fire on the head of an enemy
of her house, Mary Hope had twisted a corner of her handkerchief into
a point, moistened it by the simple and primitive method of placing
the point between her lips, and was preparing to remove the dirt from
Tom's watering eye, the ball of which was a deep pink from irritation.
But Tom swung abruptly away from her, went stilting on his high heels
to the door, pulled it open with a yank and rounded the corner where
the four Boyle children stood leaning against the house, their chilled
fingers clasped together so that two hands made one fist, their teeth
chattering while they discussed the Swedes and tried to mimic
Christian's very Swedish accent.

"_Og_ is _and_," said Minnie Boyle. "And _skoll_ is _shall_. Swede's
easy. And _med_ means _with_--"

"Aw, it's just the way they try to say it in English," Fred Boyle
contradicted. "It ain't Swede--but gee, when the Scotch and the Swede
goes in the air to-morrow, I bet there'll be fun. If Mary Hope tries
to lick Chris--"

"You kids straddle your cayuses and hit for home," Tom interrupted
them. "There ain't going to be any more school to-day. Them your
horses in the shed? Well, you hump along and saddle up and beat it.
Go!"

He did not speak threateningly, at least he did not speak angrily. But
the four Boyle children gave him one affrighted glance and started on
a run for the corral, looking back over their shoulders now and then
as if they expected a spatter of bullets to follow them.

At the corral gate Minnie Boyle stopped and turned as though she meant
to retrace her steps to the house, but Tom waved her back. So Minnie
went home weeping over the loss of a real dinner-bucket and a slate
sponge which she was afraid the Swedes might steal from her if they
came earlier to school than she.

When Tom turned to reenter the shack for a final word with Mary Hope,
and to let her give first aid to his eye if she would, he found that
small person standing just behind him with set lips and clenched fists
and her hair blowing loose from its hairpins.

"Mr. Tom Lorrigan, you can just call those children back!" she cried,
her lips bluing in the cold gale that beat upon her. "Do you think
that with all your lawlessness you can come and break up my school?
You have bullied my father--"

"I'd do worse than bully him, if I had him in handy reach right now,"
Tom drawled, and took her by the shoulder and pushed her inside. "Any
man that will let a woman sit all day in a place like this--and I
don't care a damn if you are earning money doing it!--oughta have his
neck wrung. I'm going to saddle your horse for yuh while you bundle
up. And then you're going home, if I have to herd yuh like I would a
white heifer. I always have heard of Scotch stubbornness--but there's
something beats that all to thunder. Git yore things on. Yore horse
will be ready in about five minutes."

He bettered his estimate, returning in just four minutes to find the
door locked against him. "Don't you _dare_ come in here!" Mary Hope
called out, her voice shrill with excitement. "I--I'll _brain_ you!"

"Oh, you will, will yuh?" Whereupon Tom heaved himself against the
door and lurched in with the lock dangling.

Mary Hope had a stick of wood in her two hands, but she had not that
other essential to quick combat, the courage to swing the club on the
instant of her enemy's appearance. She hesitated, backed and
threatened him futilely.

"All right--fine! Scotch stubbornness--and not a damn thing to back it
up! Where's your coat? Here. Git into it." Without any prelude, any
apology, he wrested the stick of wood from her, pulled her coat off a
nail near by, and held it outspread, the armholes convenient to her
hands. With her chin shivering, Mary Hope obeyed the brute strength of
the man. She dug her teeth into her lip and thrust her arms
spitefully into the coat sleeves.

"Here's yo're hat. Better tie it on, if yuh got anything to tie it
with. Here."

He twitched his big silk neckerchief from his neck, pulled her toward
him with a gentle sort of brutality, and tied the neckerchief over her
hat and under her chin. He did it exactly as though he was handling a
calf that he did not wish to frighten or hurt.

"Got any mittens? Gloves? Put 'em on."

Standing back in the corner behind the door, facing Tom's bigness and
his inexorable strength, Mary Hope put on her Indian tanned, beaded
buckskin gloves that were in the pockets of her coat. Tom waited until
she had tucked the coatsleeves inside the gauntlets. He took her by
the arm and pulled her to the door, pushed her through it and held her
with one hand, gripping her arm while he fastened the door by the
simple method of pulling it shut so hard that it jammed in the casing.
He led her to where her horse stood backed to the wind and tail
whipping between his legs, and his eyes blinking half shut against the
swirls of dust dug out of the dry sod of the grassland. Without any
spoken command, Tom took the reins and flipped them up over Rab's
neck, standing forward and close to the horse's shoulder. Mary Hope
knew that she must mount or be lifted bodily into the saddle. She
mounted, tears of wrath spilling from her eyes and making her cheeks
cold where they trickled down.

The Boyle children, kicking and quirting their two horses--riding
double, in the Black Rim country, was considered quite comfortable
enough for children--were already on their way home. Mary Hope looked
at their hurried retreat and turned furiously, meaning to overtake
them and order them back. Tom Lorrigan, she reminded herself, might
force her to leave the schoolhouse, but he would scarcely dare to
carry his abuse farther.

She had gone perhaps ten rods when came a pounding of hoofs, and
Coaley's head and proudly arched neck heaved alongside poor,
draggle-maned old Rab.

"You're headed wrong. Have I got to haze yuh all the way home? Might
as well. I want to tell yore dad a few things."

He twitched the reins, and Coaley obediently shouldered Rab out of the
trail and turned him neatly toward the Douglas ranch. Even Rab was
Scotch, it would seem. He laid his ears flat, swung his head
unexpectedly, and bared his teeth at Coaley. But Coaley was of the
Lorrigans. He did not bare his teeth and threaten; he reached out like
a rattler and nipped Rab's neck so neatly that a spot the size of a
quarter showed pink where the hair had been. Rab squealed, whirled and
kicked, but Coaley was not there at that particular moment. He came
back with the battle light in his eyes, and Rab clattered away in a
stiff-legged run. After him went Coaley, loping easily, with high,
rabbit jumps that told how he would love to show the speed that was in
him, if only Tom would loosen the reins a half inch.

For a mile Tom kept close to Rab's heels. Then, swinging up alongside,
he turned to Mary Hope, that baffling half smile on his lips and the
look in his eyes that had never failed to fill her with trepidation.

"I ain't blaming yuh for being Scotch and stubborn," he said, "but you
notice there's something beats it four ways from the jack. Yo go on
home, now, and don't yuh go back to that board cullender till the
weather warms up. And tell yore folks that Tom Lorrigan broke up yore
school for yuh, so they wouldn't have to break up a case of
pneumonia."

Mary Hope was framing a sentence of defiance when Coaley wheeled and
went back the way they had come, so swiftly that even with shouting
she could not have made herself heard in that whooping wind. She
pulled Rab to a willing stand and stared after Tom, hating him with
her whole heart. Hating him for his domination of her from the moment
he entered the schoolhouse where he had no business at all to be;
hating him because even his bullying had been oddly gentle; hating him
most of all because he was so like Lance--and because he was not
Lance, who was away out in California, going to college, and had never
written her one line in all the time he had been gone.

Had it been Lance who rode up to the schoolhouse door, she would have
known how to meet and master the situation. She would not have been
afraid of Lance, she told herself savagely. She wouldn't have been
afraid of Tom--but the whole Black Rim was afraid of Tom. Well, just
wait until she happened some day to meet Lance! At least she would
make him pay! For two years of silence and brooding over his hardihood
for taking her to task for her unfriendliness, and for this new and
unbearable outrage, she would make Lance Lorrigan pay, if the fates
ever let them meet again.




CHAPTER TEN

THE LORRIGAN WAY


The Lorrigan family was dining comfortably in the light of a huge lamp
with a rose-tinted shade decorated with an extremely sinuous wreath of
morning glories trailing around the lower rim. A clatter of pots and
pans told that Riley was washing his "cookin' dishes" in the lean-to
kitchen that had been added to the house as an afterthought, the fall
before. Belle had finished her dessert of hot mince pie, and leaned
back now with a freshly lighted cigarette poised in her fingers.

"What have you got up your sleeve, Tom?" she asked abruptly, handing
Duke her silver matchbox in response to a gestured request for it.

"My arm," Tom responded promptly, pushing back his wristband to give
her the proof.

"Aw, cut out the comedy, Tom. You've been doing something that you're
holding out on us. I know that look in your eye; I ought, having you
and Lance to watch. You're near enough to double in a lead and not
even the manager know which is who. You've been doing something, and
Lance knows what it is. Now, I'll get it outa you two if I have to
shoot it out."

Lance, just returned from Berkeley during Easter holidays, lifted one
eyebrow at Tom, lowered one lid very slowly, and gave his mother a
level, sidelong glance.

"Your husband, my dear madame, has been engaged in a melodramatic role
created by himself. He is painfully undecided whether the hisses of
the orchestra attest his success as a villian; whether the whistling
up in the gallery demands an encore, or heralds an offering of
cabbages and ripe poultry fruit. I myself did not witness the
production, but I did chance to meet the star just as he was leaving
the stage. To me he confided the fact that he does not know whether it
was a one-act farce he put on, or a five-act tragedy played
accidentally hind-side before, with the villian-still-pursuing-her act
set first instead of fourth. I am but slightly versed in the drama as
played in the Black Rim the past two years. Perhaps if the star would
repeat his lines--"

"For-the-Lord-sake, Lance! As a dramatic critic you're the punkest
proposition I ever slammed my door against. Talk the way you were
brought up to talk and tell me the truth. What did Tom do, and how did
he do it?"

Lance drew his black eyebrows together, studying carefully the ethics
of the case. "Belle, you must remember that Dad is my father. Dad
must remember that you are my mother--technically speaking. By heck,
if it wasn't for remembering how you used to chase me up on the barn
every day or so with your quirt, I'd swear that you grew up with me
and are at this present moment at least two years younger than I am.
However, they _say_ you are my mother. And--do you want to know,
honestly, what dad has been doing?"

"I'm _going_ to know," Belle informed him trenchantly.

"Then let me tell you. I'll break it gently. Tom, your husband, the
self-confessed father of your offspring, to-day rode to an alleged
schoolhouse, threatened, ordered, and by other felonious devices hazed
three Swedes and the four Boyle kids out of the place and toward their
several homes and then when the schoolmarm very discreetly locked the
door and mildly informed him that she would brain him with a twig off
a sage-bush if he burst the lock, he straightway forgot that he was
old enough to have a son quite old enough to frighten, abduct and
otherwise lighten the monotonous life of said schoolmarm, and became a
bold, bad man. He bursted that door off its hinges--"

"You're a liar. I busted the lock," Tom grunted, without removing the
cigarette from his lips.

"He busted the lock of that door, madame; rushed in, wrested the sprig
of sage--"

"It was a club the size of my arm."

"Wrested the club from that schoolmarm, brutally and ferociously
forced her into her coat and hat, compelled her to mount her horse,
and then deliberately drove her away from that--"

"Shut up, Lance. You remind me of one of those monstrosities they
serve in the Lava House, that they call a combination salad. It's
about two-thirds wilted lettuce and the rest beets and carrots. I
don't ever eat them, but if I did they'd taste just like you sound."

"Oh, all right, then. With only two weeks' vacation I won't have time
for a real spree of Black Rim dialect and sober up in time for the
University. Let me mix it, Belle. I'll eat my own verbal combination
salad, if anybody has to. I won't ask you."

"You'll eat 'em, all right," Tom stated briefly, lifting an eyebrow at
him. "All I done, Belle, was to ride up to the Whipple shack to see
who was camped there. It was that Douglas girl and the Boyle kids and
them Swedes that live over beyond Boyle's. They was all setting there
having school,--with their overcoats on, half froze, and the wind
howling through like it was a corral fence. So when the Douglas girl
got her Scotch up and said she wouldn't turn 'em loose to go home, I
turned 'em loose myself and told 'em to beat it. And then I hazed her
home. Seems like they think that shack is good enough for women and
kids; but I wouldn't keep pigs in it, myself, without doing a lot of
fixing on it first."

"What dad seems to overlook is the attitude Boyle and old Scotty will
take, when they hear how Tom Lorrigan broke up school for 'em.
There'll be something drop, if you ask me--I hope it drops before I
have to leave."

Belle looked at him meditatively. "And where were you, Lance? With
Mary Hope?"

For answer, Lance smiled, with his mouth twisted a little to one side,
which made him resemble Tom more than ever. "A fellow sure does hate
to have his own father cut in--"

"So that's what ails you! Well, you may just as well know first as
last that Mary Hope hasn't spoken to one of us since the time they had
Tom up in court for stealing that yearling. You know how they acted;
and if you'd come home last summer instead of fooling around in
California, you'd know they haven't changed a darn bit. It's a shame.
I used to like Mary Hope. She always seemed kinda lonesome and half
scared--"

"She's got over it, then," Tom interrupted, chuckling. "She's got
spunk enough now for two of her size. Had that club lifted, ready to
brain me when I went in, just because I'd spoiled her rules for her.
If she had as much sense as she's got nerve--"

"Why don't they build her a schoolhouse, if they want her to teach?"
Belle pushed back her chair.

"Ever know the AJ to spend a cent they didn't have to?" Duke asked.
"Or old Scotty? The Swede ain't able. How're they paying her? This
ain't any school district."

"So much a head," Tom answered. "Not much, I reckon. The girl's got
nerve. I'll say that much for her. She was dodgin' clods of dirt from
the roof, and shivering and teaching to beat hell when I got there."

"They're going to be awful sore at you, Tom, for this," Belle
predicted. "They're going to say you did it because you hate the
Douglases, and it was Mary Hope teaching. Jim Boyle will side with old
Scotty, and there'll be the devil and all to pay. Did you tell those
kids why you sent 'em home?"

"I told the girl. No, I never told the kids. The Swedes had sense
enough to beat it when she let 'em out for recess. She got fighty over
that, and wouldn't let the school out and wait for good weather, so I
went out and told the Boyle kids to hit for home. Humpin' cats,
_somebody_ had to do something!

"So then the Scotch come out strong in the girl, and I made her go
home too. If I see 'em in that shack to-morrow, and the weather like
it is and like it's going to be, I'll send 'em home again. What in
thunder do I care what old Scotty and Jim Boyle says about it? If
they want a woman to learn their kids to read, they'd oughta give her
a better place than the Whipple shack to keep school in."

"They won't," said Belle. "A roof and four walls is all you can expect
of them. It's a shame. I expect Mary Hope is tickled to death to be
earning the money, too. She was taking music all winter in Pocatello,
I heard, and she and her mother saved up the money in nickels--Lord
knows how, the way old Scotty watches them!--to pay for the lessons.
It's a shame."

"What do they do for water? Old Man Whipple always hauled it in
barrels when he tried to hold down the camp." Al, tilting back his
chair, placidly picking his teeth, spoke for the first time.

"I didn't see no water barrel," Tom answered. "I reckon they make dry
camp. They had a stove that smoked, and three benches with some kinda
shelf for their books, and the girl was using a strip of tar-paper for
a blackboard. But there was no water."

"Say, what sort of country is this Black Rim, anyway?" Lance studied
the end of his cigarette, lifting his left eyebrow just as his father
had done five minutes before. "I hope to heck I haven't come home to
remodel the morals of the country, or to strut around and play
college-young-man like a boob; but on the square, folks, it looks to
me as though the Rim needs a lesson in citizenship. It doesn't mean
anything in our lives, whether there is a schoolhouse in the country
or not. Belle has looked out for us boys, in the matter of learning
the rudiments and a good deal besides. Say, Belle, do you know they
took my voice and fitted a glee club to it? I was the glee. And a
real, live professor told me I had technique. I told him I must have
caught it changing climates--but however, what you couldn't give us
with the books, you handed us with the quirt--and here and now I want
to say I appreciate it."

"All right, I appreciate your appreciation, and I wish to heaven you
wouldn't ramble all over the range when you start to say a thing.
That's one thing you learned in school that I'd like to take outa you
with a quirt."

"I was merely pointing out how we, ourselves, personally, do not need
a schoolhouse. But I was also saying that the Rim ought to have a
lesson in real citizenship. They call the Lorrigans bad. All right;
that's a fine running start. I'd say, let's give 'em a jolt. I'm game
to donate a couple of steers toward a schoolhouse--a _regular_
schoolhouse, with the Stars and Stripes on the front end, and a bench
behind the door for the water bucket, and a blackboard up in front,
and a woodshed behind--with a door into it so the schoolmarm needn't
put on her overshoes and mittens every time she tells one of the
Swedes to put a stick of wood in the stove. I'd like to do that, and
not say a darn word until it's ready to move into. And then I'd like
to stick my hands in my pockets and watch what the Rim would do about
it.

"I've wondered quite a lot, in the last two years, whether it's the
Black Rim or the Lorrigan outfit that's all wrong. I know all about
grandad and all the various and sundry uncles and forbears that earned
us the name of being bad; it makes darn interesting stuff to tell now
and then to some of the fellows who were raised in a prune orchard and
will sit and listen with watering mouths and eyes goggling. I've been
a hero, months on end, just for the things that my grandad did in the
seventies. Of course," he pulled his lips into their whimsical smile,
"I've touched up the family biography here and there and made heroes
of us all. But the fact remains there are degrees and differences in
badness. I've a notion that the Black Rim, taken by and large, is a
damn sight worse than the Devil's Tooth outfit. I'd like to try the
experiment of making the AJ and old Scotty ashamed of themselves. I'd
like to try a schoolhouse on 'em, and see if they're human enough to
appreciate it."

Duke, turning his head slowly, glanced at Al, and from him to Tom.
Without moving a muscle of their faces the two returned his look. Al
slid his cigarette stub thoughtfully into his coffee cup and let his
breath out carefully in a long sigh that was scarcely audible. Tom
took a corner of his lower lip between his teeth, matching Lance, who
had the same trick.

"Honey, that's fine of you! There aren't many that realize what a lot
of satisfaction there is in doing something big and generous and
making the other fellow ashamed of himself. And it would be a God's
mercy to Mary Hope, poor child. Leave it to the AJ and whatever other
outfit there is to send pupils, and Mary Hope could teach in the
Whipple shack till it rattled down on top of them. I know what the
place is. I put up there once in a hailstorm. It isn't fit for cattle,
as Tom says, unless they've fixed it a lot. I'll donate the furniture;
I'll make out the order right this evening for seats and blackboard
and a globe and everything, and make it a rush order!" Belle pushed
back her chair and came around to Lance, slipped her arms around his
neck and tousled his wavy mop of hair with her chin. "If the rest
won't come through you and I'll do it, honey--"

"Who said we wouldn't?" Tom got up, stretching his arms high above his
head,--which was very bad manners, but showed how supple he still was,
and how well-muscled. "No one ever called me a piker--and let me hear
about it. Sure, we'll build a schoolhouse for 'em, seeing they're too
cussed stingy to build one themselves. There's the lumber I had hauled
out for a new chicken house; to-morrow I'll have it hauled up to some
good building spot, and we'll have it done before the AJ wakes up to
the fact that anything's going on."

"I'll chip in enough to make her big enough for dances," volunteered
Duke. "Darn this riding fifteen or twenty miles to a dance!"

"I'll paint 'er, if you let me pick out the color," said Al. "Where
are you going to set 'er?"

"What's the matter with doing the thing in style, and giving a
house-warming dance, and turning it over to the neighborhood with a
speech?" bantered Lance, as they adjourned to the big living room,
taking the idea with them and letting it grow swiftly in enthusiasm.
"That would celebrate my visit, and I'd get a chance to size up the
Rim folks and see how they react to kindness. Lordy, folks, let's do
it!"

"We might," Belle considered the suggestion, while she thumbed the
latest mail-order catalogue, the size of a family bible and much more
assiduously studied. "They'd come, all right!" she added, with a
scornful laugh. "Even old Scotty would come, if he thought it wouldn't
cost him anything."

"Well, by heck, we won't _let_ it cost him anything!" Lance stood
leaning against the wall by the stove, his arms folded, the fingers of
his left hand tapping his right forearm. He did not know that this was
a Lorrigan habit, born of an old necessity of having the right hand
convenient to a revolver butt, and matched by the habit of carrying a
six-shooter hooked inside the trousers band on the left side.

Tom, studying Lance, thought how much he resembled his grandfather on
the night Buck Sanderson was killed in a saloon in Salmon City. Old
Tom had leaned against the wall at the end of the bar, with his arms
folded and his fingers tapping his right forearm, just as Lance was
doing now. He had lifted one eyebrow and pulled a corner of his lip
between his teeth when Buck came blustering in. Just as Lance smiled
at Duke's chaffing, Tom's father had smiled when Buck came swaggering
up to him with bold eyes full of fight and his right thumb hooked in
his chap belt. Old Tom had not moved; he had remained leaning
negligently against the wall with his arms folded. But the strike of a
snake was not so quick as the drop of his hand to his gun.

Tom was not much given to reminiscence; but to-night, seeing Lance
with two years of man-growth and the poise of town life upon him, he
slipped into a swift review of changing conditions and a vague
speculation upon the value of environment in the shaping of character.
Lance was all Lorrigan. He had turned Lorrigan in the two years of his
absence, which had somehow painted out his resemblance to Belle. His
hair had darkened to a brown that was almost black. His eyes had
darkened, his mouth had the Lorrigan twist. He had grown taller,
leaner, surer in his movements,--due to his enthusiasm for athletics
and the gym, though Tom had no means of knowing what had given him
that catlike quickness, the grace of perfect muscular coordination.
Tom thought it was the Lorrigan blood building Lance true to his
forbears as he passed naturally from youth to maturity. He wondered if
Lance, given the environment which had shaped his grandfather, would
have been a "killer," hated by many, feared by all.

Even now, if it came to the point of fighting, would not Lance fight
true to the blood, true to that Lorrigan trick of the folded arms and
the tapping fingers? Would not Lance--? Tom pulled his thoughts away
from following that last conjecture to its logical end. There were
matters in which it might be best not to include Lance, just as he had
been careful not to include Belle. For Lance might still be a good
deal like Belle, in spite of his Lorrigan looks and mannerisms. And
there were certain Lorrigan traits which would not bear any mixture of
Belle in the fiber.

"Well, now, that's all made out. I'll send to Salt Lake and get the
stuff quicker. Wake up, Tom, and tell us how long it will take to put
up the schoolhouse? Lance is going to give the dance--and there won't
be so much as a soggy chocolate cake accepted from the Rimmers. What
will you do, Lance? Put up a notice in Jumpoff?"

"Surely! A mysteriously worded affair, telling little and saying much.
Music and refresh--no, by heck, that sounds too wet and not solid
enough. Music and supper furnished free. Everybody welcome. Can't
Riley drive the chuck-wagon over and have the supper served by a
camp-fire? Golly, but I've been hungry for that old chuck-wagon! That
would keep all the mess of coffee and sandwiches out of the nice, new
schoolhouse."

"Who's going to hold their hat in front of the nice, new schoolhouse
till it's done and ready? And how're you going to let 'em know where
to come to, without giving away the secret?" Al, the practical,
stretched his long legs to the stove and thrust his hands deep into
his trousers pockets while he propounded these two conundrums. "Go on,
Lance. This is yore party."

Lance unfolded his arms and disposed his big body on a bearskin
covered lounge where he could take Belle's hand and pat it and
playfully pinch a finger now and then.

"To look at your hand, Belle, a fellow would swear that a blonde
manicure girl comes here twice a week," he said idly. "Where is the
schoolhouse going to be built? Why not put it just at the foot of the
ridge, at Cottonwood Spring? That's out of sight of the road, and if
the notice said 'Cottonwood Spring', folks would know where to head
for. It's close to the line of your land, isn't it, dad? A
yard--corral-size--fenced around the place would keep the cattle off
the doorstep, and they could water there just the same. If we're going
to do it, why not do it right?"

"I guess we could get down there with a load," Tom assented easily.
"I'd ruther have it on my land anyways."

"Don't think, Tom Lorrigan, that we'd ever take it back from Mary
Hope. No matter how Scotty acts up. But if they ever gave her the
double-cross and got some one else to teach--why it might be nice to
know it's our schoolhouse, on our land." Belle pulled her hand away
from Lance and went over to the piano. "It's all done but the
shingling," she said cheerfully. "Come on, Lance, see if you can sing
'Asleep in the Deep.' And then show me what you mean by saying you can
yodel now better than when I licked you the time you and Duke chased
the colt through the corral fence!"

"All done but the shingling--and I ain't got 'em bought yet!" grumbled
Tom, but was utterly disregarded in the sonorous chords of Belle's
prelude to the song.




CHAPTER ELEVEN

LANCE RIDES AHEAD


At fifteen minutes to four on a certain Tuesday afternoon, the first
really pleasant day after the day of tearing, whooping wind that had
blown Tom into the role of school bully, Lance loped out upon the
trail that led past the Whipple shack a mile and a quarter farther on.
Ostensibly his destination was the town of Jumpoff, although it was
not the time of day when one usually started from the Devil's Tooth
ranch to the post-office, with three unimportant letters as an excuse
for the trip.

As he rode Lance sang lustily a love song, but he was not thinking
especially of Mary Hope. In two years more than one California girl
had briefly held his fancy, and memory of Mary Hope had slightly
dimmed. In his pocket were two letters, addressed to two California
towns. One letter had Miss Helene Somebody inscribed upon it, and on
the other was Miss Mildred Somebody Else. The love song, therefore,
had no special significance, save that Lance was young and perfectly
normal and liked the idea of love, without being hampered by any
definite form of it concentrated upon one girl.

For all that he had timed his trip so as to arrive at the Whipple
shack just about the time when Mary Hope would be starting home. He
was curious to see just how much or how little she had changed; to
know whether she still had that funny little Scotch accent that
manifested itself in certain phrasings, certain vowel sounds at
variance with good English pronunciation. He wanted to know just how
much Pocatello had done to spoil her. Beneath all was the primal
instinct of the young male dimly seeking the female whom his destiny
had ordained to be his mate.

As a young fellow shut in behind the Rim, with the outside world a
vast area over which his imagination wandered vaguely, Mary Hope had
appealed to him. She was the one girl in the Black Rim country whom he
would ride out of his way to meet, whose face, whose voice, lingered
with him pleasantly for days after he had seen her and talked with
her. He reflected, between snatches of song, that he might have
thought himself in love with Mary Hope, might even have married her,
had Belle not suddenly decided that he should go beyond the Rim and
learn the things she could not teach him. Belle must have wanted him,
her youngest, to be different from the rest. He wondered with a sudden
whimsical smile, whether she was satisfied with the result of his two
years of exile. Tom, he suspected, was not,--nor were Duke and Al.
The three seemed to hold themselves apart from him, to look upon him
as a guest rather than as one of the family returned after an absence.
They did not include him in their talk of range matters and the
business of the ranch. He had once observed in them a secret
embarrassment when he appeared unexpectedly, had detected a swift
change of tone and manner and subject.

Surely they could not think he had changed sufficiently to make him an
outsider, he meditated. Aside from his teasing of Belle, he had
dropped deliberately into the range vernacular, refraining only from
certain crudities of speech which grated on his ears. He had put on
his old clothes, he had tried to take his old place in the ranch work.
He had driven a four-horse team up the Ridge trail with lumber for the
schoolhouse, and had negotiated the rock descent to Cottonwood Spring
with a skill that pleased him mightily because it proved to him--and
to Tom and the boys--that his range efficiency had not lessened during
his absence. He had done everything the boys had done, except ride out
with them on certain long trips over the range. He had not gone simply
because they had made it quite plain that they did not want him.

Nor did the hired cowboys want him with them,--ten of them in the bunk
house with a cook of their own, and this only the middle of March! In
two years the personnel of the bunk house had changed almost
completely. They were men whom he did not know, men who struck him as
"hard-boiled," though he could not have explained just wherein they
differed from the others. Sam Pretty Cow and Shorty he could hobnob
with as of yore,--Sam in particular giving him much pleasure with his
unbroken reserve, his unreadable Indian eyes and his wide-lipped grin.
The others were like Duke, Tom and Al,--slightly aloof, a bit guarded
in their manner.

"And I suppose Mary Hope will be absolutely spoiled, with small-town
dignity laid a foot deep over her Scotch primness. Still, a girl that
has the nerve to lift a club and threaten to brain Tom Lorrigan--"

He had forgotten the love song he was singing, and before he reached
farther in his musings he met the Swedes, who stared at him round-eyed
and did not answer his careless hello. A little farther, the Boyle
children rode up out of a dry wash, grinned bashfully at him and
hurried on.

A saddlehorse was tied to a post near the Whipple shack. With long
legs swinging slightly with the stride of his horse, reins held
high and loose in one hand, his big hat tilted over his forehead,
Lance rode up and dismounted as if his errand, though important, was
not especially urgent. The door stood open. He walked up, tapped
twice with his knuckles on the unpainted casing, and entered,
pulling off his hat and turning it round and round in his gloved
fingers while he ducked his head, pressed his lips together with a
humorous quirk, shuffled his spurred feet on the dirty floor and
bowed again as awkwardly as he could. In this manner he hoped to
draw some little spark of individuality from Mary Hope, who sat behind
her yellow-painted table and stared at him over her folded arms.
But Mary Hope, he observed, had been crying, and compunction seized
him suddenly.

"Well, what is it?" she asked him curtly, rubbing a palm down over one
cheek, with the motion obliterating a small rivulet of tears.

"If you please, ma'am, I was sent to mend a lock on a door."

"What lock? On what door?" Mary Hope passed a palm down her other
cheek, thus obliterating another rivulet that had ceased to flow tears
and was merely wet and itchy.

"If you please, ma'am, you can search me." Lance looked at her
innocently. "I didn't bring any lock with me, and I didn't bring any
door with me. But I've got some screws and three nails and--lots of
good intentions."

"Good intentions are very rare in this country," said Mary Hope, and
made meaningless marks on the bare tabletop with a blunt pencil.

Lance heard a twang of Scotch in the "very rare" which pleased him.
But he kept his position by the doorway, and he continued bashfully
turning his big hat round and round against his chest,--though the
action went oddly with the Lorrigan look and the athletic poise of
him. "Yes, ma'am. Quite rare," he agreed.

"In fact, I don't believe there is such a thing in the whole Black Rim
country," stated Mary Hope, plainly nonplussed at his presence and
behavior.

"Could I show you mine?" Lance advanced a step. He was not sure, at
that moment, whether he wanted to go with the play. Mary Hope was
better looking than when he had seen her last. She had lost a good
deal of the rusticity he remembered her to have possessed, but she was
either too antagonistic to carry on the farce, or she was waiting for
him to show his hand, to betray some self-consciousness. But the fact
that she looked at him straight in the eyes and neither frowned nor
giggled, set her apart from the ordinary range-bred girl.

"You talk like a country peddler. I'm willing to accept a sample, and
see if they are durable. Though I can't for the life of me see why
you'd be coming here with good intentions."

"I'd be mending a lock on a door. Is this the door, ma'am? And is this
the lock?"

Since the door behind him was the only door within five miles of them,
and since the lock dangled from a splintered casing, Mary Hope almost
smiled. "It is a door," she informed him. "And it is a lock that has
been broken by a Lorrigan."

She was baiting him, tempting him to quarrel with her over the old
grudge. Because she expected a reply, Lance made no answer whatever.
He happened to have a dozen or so of nails in his coat pocket,
left-overs from his assiduous carpentry on the house being builded for
her comfort. The screws he possessed were too large, and he had no
hammer. But no man worries over a missing hammer where rocks are
plentiful, and Lance was presently pounding the lock into place, his
back to Mary Hope, his thoughts swinging from his prospective party to
the possible religious scruples of the Douglas family.

Mary Hope used to dance--a very little--he remembered, though she had
not attended many dances. He recalled suddenly that a Christmas tree
or a Fourth of July picnic had usually been the occasions when Mary
Hope, with her skirts just hitting her shoe tops in front and sagging
in an ungainly fashion behind, had teetered solemnly through a
"square" dance with him. Mother Douglas herself had always sat very
straight and prim on a bench, her hands folded in her lap and her eyes
blinking disapprovingly at the ungodly ones who let out an exultant
little yip now and then when they started exuberantly through the
mazes of the "gran'-right-n-left."

Would Mary Hope attend the party? Should he tell her about it and
ask her to come? Naturally, he could not peacefully escort her
partyward,--the feud was still too rancorous for that. Or was it?
At the Devil's Tooth they spoke of old Scotty as an enemy, but they
had cited no particular act of hostility as evidence of his enmity.
At the Devil's Tooth they spoke of the whole Black Rim country as
enemy's country. Lance began to wonder if it were possible that
the Lorrigans had adopted unconsciously the role of black sheep,
without the full knowledge or concurrence of the Black Rimmers.

He did what he could to make a workable lock of one that had been
ready to fall to pieces before his father heaved against it; hammered
in the loosened screws in the hinges, tossed the rock out into the
scuffed sod before the shack, and picked up his hat. He had not once
looked toward Mary Hope, but he turned now as if he were going to say
good-by and take himself off; as if mending the lock had really been
his errand, and no further interest held him there.

He surprised a strange, wistful look in Mary Hope's eyes, a trembling
of her lips. She seemed to be waiting, fearing that he meant to go
without any further overtures toward friendship.

The Whipple shack was not large. Ten feet spanned the distance between
them. Impulsively Lance covered that distance in three steps. At the
table he stopped, leaned toward her with his palms braced upon the
table, and stared full into Mary Hope's disturbed eyes.

"Girl," he said, drawing the word softly along a vibrant note in his
voice that sent a tremor through her, "Girl, you're more lonesome than
Scotch, and you're more Scotch than the heather that grows in your
front yard to make your mother cry for the Highlands she sees when her
eyes blur with homesickness. You were crying when I came--crying
because you're lonely. It's a big, wild country--the Black Rim. It's a
country for men to ride hell-whooping through the sage and camas
grass, with guns slung at their hips, but it's no country for a little
person like you to try and carry on a feud because her father made
one. You're--too little!"

He did not touch her, his face did not come near her face. But in his
eyes, in his voice, in the tender, one-sided little smile, there was
something,--Mary Hope caught her breath, feeling as if she had been
kissed.

"You little, lonesome girl! There's going to be a party at Cottonwood
Spring, a week from Friday night. It's a secret--a secret for you. And
you won't tell a soul that you were the first to know--and you'll
come, you girl, because it's your party. And not a soul will know it's
your party. If your father's Scotch is too hard for dancing--you'll
come just the same. You'll come, because the secret is for you. And--"
He thought that he read something in her eyes and hastened to
forestall her intention "--and you won't go near Cottonwood Spring
before the time of the party, because that wouldn't be playing fair.

"Don't be lonely, girl. The world is full of pleasant things, just
waiting to pop out at you from behind every bush. If you're good and
kind and honest with life, the Fates are going to give you the best
they've got. Don't be lonely! Just wait for the pleasant things in
to-morrow and to-morrow--in all the to-morrows. And one of them, girl,
is going to show you the sweetest thing in life. That's love, you girl
with the tears back of your Scotch blue eyes. But wait for it--and
take the little pleasant things that minutes have hidden away in the
to-morrows. And one of the pleasant times will be hidden at Cottonwood
Spring, a week from Friday night. Wonder what it will be, girl. And if
any one tries to tell it, put your hands over your ears, so that you
won't hear it. Wait--and keep wondering, and come to Cottonwood Spring
next Friday night. Adios, girl."

He looked into her eyes, smiling a little. Then, turning suddenly, he
left her without a backward glance. Left her with nothing to spoil
the haunting cadence of his voice, nothing to lift the spell of
tender prophecy his words had laid upon her soul. When he was quite
gone, when she heard the clatter of his horse's hoofs upon the arid
soil that surrounded the Whipple shack, Mary Hope still stared out
through the open doorway, seeing nothing of the March barrenness,
seeing only the tender, inscrutable, tantalizing face of Lance
Lorrigan,--tantalizing because she could not plumb the depths of his
eyes, could not say how much of the tenderness was meant for her, how
much was born of the deep music of his voice, the whimsical,
one-sided smile.

And Lance, when he had ridden a furlong from the place, had dipped
into a shallow draw and climbed the other side, turned half around in
the saddle and looked back.

"Now, why did I go off and leave her like that? Like an actor walking
off the stage to make room for the other fellow to come on and say his
lines. There's no other fellow--thank heck! And here are two miles we
might be riding together--and me preaching to her about taking the
little, pleasant things that come unexpectedly!" He swung his horse
around in the trail, meaning to ride back; retraced his steps as far
as the hollow, and turned again, shaking his head.

"Anybody could stop at the schoolhouse just as school's out, and ride
a couple of miles down the road with the schoolma'am--if she let him
do it! Anybody could do that. But that isn't the reason, why I'm
riding on ahead. What the hell is the reason?"

He stopped again on the high level where he could look back and see
the Whipple shack squatted forlornly in the gray stretch of sage with
wide, brown patches of dead grass between the bushes.

"Lonesome," he named the wild expanse of unpeopled range land. "She's
terribly lonely--and sweet. Too lonely and sweet for me to play with,
to ride a few miles with--and leave her lonelier than I found her. I
couldn't. There's enough sadness now in those Scotch blue eyes. Damned
if I'll add more!"

He saw Mary Hope come from the shack, pause a minute on the doorstep,
then walk out to where her horse was tied to the post. He lifted the
reins, pricked his horse gently with the spurs and galloped away to
Jumpoff, singing no more.




CHAPTER TWELVE

SHE WILL, AND SHE WON'T


Cottonwood Spring was a dished-out oasis just under the easy slope of
Devil's Tooth Ridge. From no part of the Jumpoff trail could it be
seen, and the surrounding slope did not offer much inducement to
cattle in March, when water was plentiful; wherefore riders would
scarcely wander into the saucer-like hollow that contained the
cottonwoods and the spring. A picnic had once been held there, but the
festivities had been marred by a severe thunderstorm that came just as
a wordy quarrel between two drunken cowpunchers was fast nearing the
gun-pulling stage. Lightning had struck the side hill just beyond the
grove, and the shock of it had knocked down and stunned the two
disputants, and three saddle horses standing in the muddy overflow
from the spring. For this reason, perhaps, and because it was on
Lorrigan land, the place had never thereafter been frequented save by
the stock that watered there.

But from the head of the little basin a wide view was had of the
broken land beyond Devil's Tooth. The spring was clear and cold and
never affected by drouth. By following the easy slope around the point
of the main trail from Jumpoff to the Lorrigan ranch, no road-building
was necessary, and in summer the cottonwoods looked very cool and
inviting--though at certain times they harbored buffalo gnats and many
red ants that would bite, which rendered the shade less grateful than
it looked. But to the Lorrigans it seemed an ideal site for a
schoolhouse.

Ten days after they had planned the deed, the schoolhouse stood ready
for the dance. In the lean-to shed, twelve shiny yellow desks that
smelled strongly of varnish were stacked in their heavy paper
swaddlings, waiting to be set in place when the dance was done. Belle
herself had hemmed scrim curtains for the windows, which Riley had
washed copiously. The blackboard, with the names of various Devil's
Tooth men and a "motto" or two scrawled upon it was in place; the
globe was on the teacher's desk, and the water bucket on its shelf in
the corner, with a shiny new tin dipper hanging on a nail above it.

If you were to believe the frequent declarations, every puncher on the
ranch had done his durnedest to put 'er up, and put 'er up right. Sam
Pretty Cow had nailed a three-foot American flag to the front gable,
and had landed on a nail when he jumped from the eaves. On the night
of the dance he was hobbling around the chuck-wagon with half a pound
of salt pork bound to his foot, helping Riley, who had driven over to
the spring early, burdened with the importance of his share in the
entertainment.

A dance in the Black Rim country has all the effect of a dog fight in
a small village with empty streets. No sooner does it start than one
wonders where all the people came from.

At eight o'clock toiling horses drawing full loads of humanity began
to appear over the rim of the hollow, to pick their way carefully down
toward the lighted windows, urged by their drivers. Men on horseback
made the descent more swiftly, with a clatter of small rocks kicked
loose as they came. They encountered a four-wire fence, circled it to
where a lantern, hung on a post, revealed a gate that lay flat on the
ground to leave a welcoming space for teams and saddle horses to pass
through.

Beside the schoolhouse, with two lanterns shedding a yellow glow on
his thin, sandy hair, Riley, at the chuck-wagon, arranged doughnuts,
sandwiches, pies and cakes to his liking, wiped his red hands
frequently on his clean flour-sack apron, and held carefully unprofane
conversation with the women who came fluttering over to him, their
arms burdened.

"No, mom, sorry! I know I'm turnin' down something that's better than
anything I got here, but this here party's on the Lorrigans. No, mom,
I got orders not to take in s'much as a sour pickle from nobody. You
jest put it back in the rig, whatever you got there, and consider't
you got some Sat'day bakin' did up ahead.

"Yes, mom, it's Lance's party. He's home for a visit, an' he kinda
wanted to have a dance an' meet the folks, seein' he's been away quite
a spell and kain't stay long.

"Yes, mom, he's goin' back to college first the week.

"Hey! I wisht you'd tie up yore cayuses other side the shack. Folks'll
be comin' around here for their supper, and they don't wanta git their
faces kicked off whilst they're huntin' grub to fill 'em.

"No, mom, we ain't takin' any cakes or nothin' off nobody. Lance, he
wanted to give this dance an' give it _right_. Ain't goin' to cost
nobody a thing but sore corns, t'night!"

Lance had hired an Italian violinist and his boy who played a harp
much taller than himself and people coming from Jumpoff had brought
them out. The Millers had come, with all their outfit. The AJ outfit
was there to a man. The Swedes were present, sitting together in the
corner by the water bucket, and the Conleys, who lived over by Camas
Creek beyond the AJ, had come. The Conleys had sheep, and were not
firmly settled in the Black Rim, sheepmen being looked at askance.
There were families from nearer Jumpoff,--one really did wonder where
they all came from, when the country seemed so wide and unpeopled.

Lance was surprised to see how many were there who were total
strangers. Until the dancing began the men stood outside and smoked,
leaving the women and children to arrange themselves on benches along
the wall inside. Lance knew the custom well enough, and he did not go
in. But he tried to see who came with every load that was deposited
within the circle of light on the narrow platform that embellished the
front.

At nine o'clock, when the musicians were trying their instruments
tentatively and even the most reluctant male was being drawn
irresistibly to the humming interior, Lance frankly admitted to
himself that he was not happy, and that his condition was the direct
result of not having seen Mary Hope enter the door.

He sought out Tom, who was over at the chuck-wagon, taking an early
cup of coffee. Tom blew away the steam that rose on the chill night
air and eyed Lance. "Well, when do we make the speech? Or don't we?"
he demanded, taking a gulp and finding the coffee still too hot for
comfort. "Don't ask me to; I done my share when I built 'er. You can
tell the bunch what she's for."

"Oh, what the heck do we want with a speech?" Lance remonstrated.
"They know it's a schoolhouse, unless they're blind. And I thought
maybe some one--you, probably, since you're the one who hazed her out
of the other place--would just tell Mary Hope to bring her books over
here and teach. And I thought, to cinch it, you could tell Jim Boyle
that you felt you ought to do something toward a school, and since you
couldn't furnish any kids, you thought you'd furnish the house. That
ought to be easy. It's up to you, I should say. But I wouldn't make
any speech."

Tom grunted, finished his coffee and proceeded to remove all traces of
it from his lips with his best white handkerchief. "Where's Jim Boyle
at?" he asked, moving into the wide bar of dusk that lay between the
lights of the chuck-wagon and the glow from the two windows facing
that way.

"I believe I'd speak about it first to Mary Hope," Lance suggested,
coming behind him. "But she hasn't come yet--"

As if she heard and deliberately moved to contradict him, Mary Hope
danced past the window, the hand of a strange young man with a crisp
white handkerchief pressed firmly between her shoulder blades. Mary
Hope was dancing almost as solemnly as in the days of short skirts and
sleek hair, her eyes apparently fixed upon the shoulder of her partner
who gazed straight out over her head, his whole mind centered upon
taking the brunt of collisions upon the point of his upraised elbow.

"I'll ketch her when she's through dancing," promised Tom. But Lance
had another thought.

"Let me tell Mary Hope, dad. I'm going to dance with her, and it will
be easy."

In the darkness Tom grinned and went on to find Jim Boyle standing in
a group of older men on the platform that served as a porch. Jim Boyle
was smoking a cheap cigar brought out from Jumpoff by the section
boss. He listened reflectively, looked at the glowing tip of the
evil-smelling cigar, threw the thing from him and reached for his
cigarette papers with an oath.

"Now, that's damn white of yuh, Tom," he said. "I leave it to the
boys if it ain't damn white. Not having no school district I'm puttin'
up the money outa my own pocket to pay the teacher. And havin' four
kids to feed and buy clothes for, I couldn't afford to build no
schoolhouse, I tell yuh those. And uh course, I didn't like to go
round askin' fer help; but it's damn white of yuh to step in an' do
yore share towards making the Rim look like it was civilized.
Sederson, he'll feel the same way about it. And I'm gitting a
foreman that's got a kid, school age; we sure'n hell do need a
schoolhouse. Rim's settlin' up fast. I always said, Tom, that you
was white. I leave it to the boys here."

Inside, Lance was not finding it so easy to make the announcement.
Last Tuesday, Mary Hope had not understood just why he had ridden
on ahead of her for two miles--she could see the small dust cloud
kicked up by his horse on the Jumpoff trail, so there could be no
mistake--when he knew perfectly well that she must ride that way, when
he could not have failed to see her horse saddled and waiting at
the door. It seemed to Mary Hope an obscure form of mockery to tell
her not to be lonely--to tell her in a caressing tone that left with
her all the effect of kisses--and then to ride away without one
backward glance, one word of excuse. Until she had mounted and had
seen him on the trail ahead, she had not realized how he had mocked
her.

For days--until Friday, to be explicit--she had been quite determined
not to go near Cottonwood Spring. Then she had suddenly changed her
mind, dismissed school half an hour early, put old Rab in a lather on
the way home, dressed herself and announced to her mother that she
must ride into Jumpoff for school supplies, and that she would stay
all night with the Kennedys. It had taken two years and the dignity of
school-teacher to give Mary Hope the courage to announce things to her
mother. As it was, she permitted her mother to explain as best she
might to Hugh Douglas. Her courage did not reach to that long,
uncompromising upper lip of her father's.

She had folded her prettiest dress carefully into a flat bundle, had
thrown it out of her window and left the house in her riding clothes.
There was a saddle horse, Jamie, a Roman-nosed bay of uncertain temper
and a high, rocking gait, which she sometimes used for long trips. She
saddled him now and hurried away, thankful to be gone with her
package and her guilty conscience before her father arrived. She was
very good friends with the Kennedys, at the section house. If there
was a dance within forty miles, the Kennedys might be counted upon to
attend; and that is how Mary Hope arrived at the schoolhouse with a
load from Jumpoff. She had seen Lance standing near the door, and
Lance had paid no attention to her, but had left an AJ man to claim
the first two-step. Wherefore Lance walked straight into trouble when
he went to Mary Hope and asked for the next dance with her.

"So sorry--it's promised already," said Mary Hope, in her primmest
tone.

"There's a dance after the next one," he hinted, looking down from his
more-than-six feet at her where she sat wedged between Mrs. Boyle and
Jennie Miller.

"So sorry--but I think that one is promised also," said Mary Hope.

Lance drew a corner of his lip between his teeth, let it go and lifted
his eyebrows whimsically at Jennie Miller, whom he had once heard
playing on her organ, and whom he had detested ever since with an
unreasoning animosity born solely of her musical inability and her
long neck that had on its side a brown mole with three coarse hairs in
it.

"If Miss Douglas has two dances engaged in advance, it's quite
hopeless to hope for a dance with Miss Miller," he said, maliciously
drawing the sentence through certain vibrant tones which experience
had taught him had a certain pleasing effect upon persons. "Or is it
hopeless? Are you engaged for every dance to-night, Miss Miller? And
if you are, please may I stand beside you while you eat a sandwich at
midnight?"

Jennie Miller giggled. "I ain't as popular as all that," she retorted,
glancing at Mary Hope, sitting very straight and pretty beside her.
"And if I was, I don't go and promise everybody that asks. I might
want to change my mind afterwards if some other fellow comes along I
liked better--and I've saw too many fights start over a girl
forgetting who she's promised to dance with."

"You don't want to see a fight start now, do you?" Lance smiled down
at her without in the least degree betraying to Mary Hope that he
would like to pull Jennie Miller by force from that seat and occupy it
himself.

"I never can see why men fight over things. I hate fights," Miss
Miller stammered, agitated by a wild feeling that perhaps she was
going to be made love to.

"Then don't forget that you are going to dance with me." The music
just then started again, and he offered her his arm with a certain
import that made Mary Hope clench her hands.

Mary Hope was punished for her lie. She had not promised that dance,
and so she sat on the plank bench and saw Lance and Jennie Miller
sway past her four times before a gawky youth who worked for her
father caught sight of her and came over from the water-bucket corner
to ask her for the dance. That was not the worst. On the fourth round
of Lance and Jennie, and just as the gawky one was bowing stiffly
before her, Lance looked at her over Jennie Miller's shoulder, and
smiled that tantalizing, Lorrigan smile that always left her uneasily
doubtful of its meaning.




CHAPTER THIRTEEN

A WAY HE HAD WITH HIM


It was at the chuck-wagon at midnight, while Riley and Sam Pretty Cow
were serving tin cups of black coffee to a shuffling, too-hilarious
crowd, that Lance next approached Mary Hope. She was standing on the
outskirts of a group composed mostly of women, quite alone so far as
cavaliers were concerned, for the gawky youth had gone after coffee.
She was looking toward the sagebrush camp-fire around which a crowd of
men had gathered with much horseplay at which they were laughing
loudly, and she was wondering how best she could make Lance Lorrigan
aware of her absolute indifference to him, when his voice drawled
disconcertingly close to her ear:

"You're not lonely now, you girl--and you did find a secret at
Cottonwood Spring. A pleasant little secret, wasn't it?"

Mary Hope's hands became fists at her side, held close against her
best frock. "I think the fellows over by the fire have discovered your
pleasant secret," she said, and did not turn her face toward him.

With his arms folded and his eyebrows pulled together and his lip
between his teeth, Lance stared down at her face, studying it in the
flicker of the distant firelight and the two lanterns. If her
combativeness roused in him any resentment, he did not permit it to
show in his voice.

"Some of the fellows from Jumpoff brought a bottle or two. That's no
secret, except that I don't know where they have it cached. The
schoolhouse is your--"

"I heard it was included in the Lorrigan refreshments."

"The schoolhouse is ready for your pleasure Monday morning," Lance
spoke with that perfect impersonal courtesy that is so exasperating to
a person who listens for something to resent. "I knew of it, of
course--dad wanted it kept for a surprise. And he wanted me to tell
you. It's the Lorrigan expression of their appreciation of the need of
a school."

The gawky youth came stumbling up, his outstretched hands carefully
holding two tin cups filled with coffee close to the boiling point.
Being a youth of good intentions, he tried very hard not to spill a
drop. Being gawky, he stubbed his toe as he was rounding the group of
women, and Mrs. Miller shrieked and swung back her hand, cuffing the
gawky one straight into the thickest of the crowd. Other women
screamed.

Lance reached a long arm and plucked the youth out by the slack
of his coat, shook him and propelled him into the darkness, where
he collided violently with Sam Pretty Cow. Some one had been
over-generous with Sam Pretty Cow. A drunken Indian is never quite
safe. Sam Pretty Cow struck out blindly, yelling Piegan curses
hoarsely as he fought. The crowd of men around the camp-fire came
running. For a short space there was confusion, shouting, the shrill
voices of scalded women denouncing the accident as a deliberate
outrage.

Mrs. Miller whirled on Lance. "You pushed him on me! If that ain't a
Lorrigan trick!--"

"Yeah--what yuh mean? Throwin' bilin' hot coffee on--"

"Who says it's a Lorrigan trick?"

"Might 'a' known what to expect--"

"Get back here, away from the crowd. There may be shooting," Lance
muttered to Mary Hope, and pulled her to the rear of the wagon and
around upon the farther side. She could not resist. His strength was
beyond any hope of combating it with her small strength. Mrs. Miller,
whose scalded shoulder led her to wild utterances without thought of
their effect upon others, shouted at him as he hustled Mary Hope
away:

"Yeah--_run!_ You're the one that done it--now run! That's like a
Lorrigan--do your dirty work and then crawl out and let somebody else
take the blame! That kid never--"

"Aw, come back and fight, you big sneak!" A drunken voice bellowed
hoarsely, and a gunshot punctuated the command.

"Go on--get on the other side of the schoolhouse. Run! The fools will
all start to shooting now!"

Mary Hope stopped stubbornly. "I will not!" she defied him; and Lance
without more argument lifted her from the ground, stooped and tossed
her under the wagon, much as he would have heaved a bag of oats out of
the rain.

"Don't you move until I tell you to," he commanded her harshly, and
ran back, diving into the thick of the crowd as though he were
charging into a football scrimmage.

"Who was it called me back to fight? Put up your guns,--or keep them
if you like. It's all one to me!"

In the dim light he saw the gleam of a weapon raised before him,
reached out and wrenched it away from the owner, and threw it far over
his shoulder into the weeds. "Who said a Lorrigan run? I want that
man!"

"I said it," bellowed a whisky-flushed man whose face was strange to
him. "I said it, and I say it agin. I say--a Lorrigan!"

He lifted his gun above the pressure of excited men and women. Lance
sprung upward and forward, landed on some one's foot, lunged again and
got a grip on the hand that held the gun. With his left hand he
wrenched the gun away. With his right he pulled the man free of the
crowd and out where there was room. The crowd--men, now, for the women
had fled shrieking--surged that way.

"Stand back there! I'll settle with this fellow alone." He held the
other fast, his arms as merciless as the grip of a grizzly, and called
aloud:

"This is a Lorrigan dance, and the Lorrigans are going to have order.
Those of you who brought chips on your shoulders, and whisky to soak
the chips in, can drink your whisky and do your fighting among
yourselves, off the Lorrigan ranch. We all came here to have fun.
There's music and room to dance, and plenty of chuck and plenty of
coffee, and the dance is going right on without any fuss whatever.

"This poor boob here who thinks he wants to fight me just because I'm
a Lorrigan, I never saw before. It wouldn't be a fair fight, because
he's too drunk to do anything but make a fool of himself. There's
nothing to fight about, anyway. A fellow was carrying two cups of
boiling hot coffee, and he stubbed his toe, and some one got scalded a
little. That's nothing to break up a dance over. The rest of you heard
the noise and jumped at the conclusion there was trouble afoot. There
isn't. I think you all want to go on with the dance and have a good
time, except perhaps a few who are drunk. They are at liberty to go
off somewhere and beat each other up to their hearts' content. Come
on, now, folks--get your partners for a square dance--and _everybody
dance!_"

His voice had held them listening. His words were not the words of a
coward, yet they were a plea for peace, they seemed reasonable even to
the half-drunken ones who had been the readiest to fight. The old-time
range slogan, "_Everybody dance!_" sent three or four hurrying to find
the girls they wanted. The trouble, it would appear, had ended as
suddenly as it had begun and for a moment the tension relaxed.

The drunken one was still cursing, struggling unavailingly to tear
himself away from Lance so that he could land a blow. Lance, looking
out across the crowd, caught Belle's glance and nodded toward the
schoolhouse. Belle hurried away to find the musicians and set them
playing, and a few couples strayed after her. But there were men who
stayed, pushing, elbowing to see what would happen when Lance Lorrigan
loosened his hold on the Jumpoff man.

Lance did not loosen his hold, however. He saw Tom, Al, three or four
Devil's Tooth men edging up, and sent them a warning shake of his
head.

"Who knows this fellow? Where does he belong? I think his friends had
better take care of him until he sobers up."

"We'll take care of him," said another stranger, easing up to Lance.
"He won't hurt yuh; he was only foolin', anyway. Bill Kennedy, he
always gits kinda happy when he's had one or two."

There was laughter in the crowd. Two or three voices were heard
muttering together, and other laughs followed. Some one produced a
bottle and offered the pugnacious one a drink. Lance let him go with a
contemptuous laugh and went to where the Devil's Tooth men now stood
bunched close together, their backs to the chuck-wagon.

"We'll have to clean up this crowd, before it's over," Al was saying
to his father. "Might as well start right in and git 'er over with."

"And have it said the Lorrigans can't give a dance without having it
end in rough-house!" Lance interrupted. "Cut out the idea of fighting
that bunch. Keep them out of the house and away from the women, and
let them have their booze down in the grove. That's where I've seen a
lot of them heading. Come on, boys; it takes just as much nerve not to
fight as it does to kill off a dozen men. Isn't that right, dad?"

"More," said Tom laconically. "No, boys, we don't want no trouble
here. Come on in and dance. That's yore job--to keep 'er moving
peaceable. I'll fire any man I ketch drinking Jumpoff booze. We've got
better at the ranch. Come on!"

He led the way and his men followed him,--not as though they were
particularly anxious to avoid trouble, but more like men who are
trained to obey implicitly a leader who has some definite purpose and
refuses to be turned from it. Lance, walking a few steps in the rear,
wondered at the discipline his father seemed to maintain without any
apparent effort.

"And they say the Lorrigans are a tough outfit!" he laughed, when he
had overtaken Tom. "Dad, you've got the bunch trained like soldiers. I
was more afraid our boys would rough things up than I was worried over
the stews."

"Shucks! When we rough things up, it's when _we_ want it rough. Al, he
was kinda excited. But at that, we may have to hogtie a few of them
smart Alecks from town, before we can dance peaceable."

Mary Hope, Lance discovered, was already in the schoolhouse. Also,
several of the intoxicated were there, and the quadrille was being
danced with so much zest that the whole building shook. That in itself
was not unusual--Black Rim dances usually did become rather boisterous
after supper--but just outside the door a bottle was being circulated
freely, and two or three men had started toward the cottonwood grove
for more. Duke, coming up to Lance where he stood in the doorway,
pulled him to one side, where they could not be overheard.

"There's going to be trouble here, sure's you're knee-high to a duck.
Dad won't let our bunch light into 'em, but they'll be fighting
amongst themselves inside an hour. You better slip it to the women
that the dance breaks up early. Give 'em a few more waltzes and
two-steps, Lance, and then make it Home-Sweet-Home, if you don't want
to muss up your nice city clothes," he added, with a laugh that was
not altogether friendly.

"Mussing up nice city clothes is my favorite pastime," Lance retorted,
and went inside again to see who was doing all the whooping. The chief
whooper, he discovered, was Bill Kennedy, the man whom he had very
nearly thrashed. Mary Hope was looking her Scotch primmest. Lance
measured the primness, saw that there was a vacant space beside her,
and made his precarious way toward it, circling the dancers who swung
close to the benches and trod upon the toes of the wall flowers in
their enthusiasm. He reached the vacant space and sat down just in
time to receive Bill Kennedy in his lap. But Bill was too happy just
then to observe whose lap he landed in, and bounced up with a
bellowing laugh to resume his gyrations.

"Don't dance any more, girl," Lance said, leaning so that he could
make himself heard without shouting in the uproar. "It's getting
pretty wild--and it will be wilder. They must have hauled it out in
barrels!"

Mary Hope looked at him, but she did not smile, did not answer.

"I'm sorry the secret is no nicer," Lance went on. "Now the floor will
have to be scrubbed before a lady girl can come out and teach school
here. I thought it would be great to have a house-warming dance,--but
they're making it too blamed warm!"

Some one slipped and fell, and immediately there was a struggling heap
where others had fallen over the first. There were shrieks of laughter
and an oath or two, an epithet and then a loud-flung threat.

Lance started up, saw that Tom and Al were heading that way, and took
Mary Hope by the arm.

"It's time little girls like you went home," he said smiling, and
somehow got her to the door without having her trampled upon. "Where
are your wraps?"

"There," said Mary Hope dazedly, and pointed to the corner behind
them, where cloaks, hoods, hats and two sleeping children were piled
indiscriminately.

Through the doorway men were crowding, two or three being pushed out
only to be pushed in again by others eager to join the melee. In the
rear of the room, near the musicians, two men were fighting. Lance,
giving one glance to the fight and another to the struggling mass in
the doorway, pushed up the window nearest them, lifted Mary Hope and
put her out on the side hill. He felt of a coat or two, chose the
heaviest, found something soft and furry like a cap, and followed her.
Behind the door no one seemed to look. A solid mass of backs was
turned toward him when he wriggled through on his stomach.

"Where's your horse?" he asked Mary Hope, while he slipped the coat on
her and buttoned it.

"It does seem to me that a Lorrigan is _always_ making me put on a
coat!" cried Mary Hope petulantly. "And now, this isn't mine at all!"

"A non-essential detail. It's a coat, and that's all that matters.
Where is your horse?"

"I haven't any horse here--oh, they're killing each other in there!
The Kennedys brought me--and he's that drunk, now--"

"Good heck! Bill Kennedy! Well, come on. You couldn't go back with
them, that's sure. I'll take you home, girl." He was leading her by
the arm to the fence behind the house. "Wait, I'll lift a wire; can
you crawl under?"

"Now, I've torn it! I heard it rip. And it isn't my coat at all," said
Mary Hope. "Oh, they're murdering one another! I should think you'd be
ashamed, having a dance like--"

"Coats can be bought--and murdered men don't swear like that. I'll
have to borrow Belle's pintos, but we don't care, do we? Come on. Here
they are. Don't get in until I get them untied and turned around. And
when I say get in, you'd better make it in one jump. Are you game?"

"No Lorrigan will ever cry shame on a Douglas for a coward! You must
be crazy, taking this awful team."

"I am. I'm crazy to get you away from here before they start shooting,
back there." He spoke to the team gruffly and with a tone of authority
that held them quiet, wondering at his audacity perhaps. He untied
them, got the lines, stepped in and turned them around, the pintos
backing and cramping the buckboard, lunging a little but too surprised
to misbehave in their usual form.

"Get in--and hang on. There's no road much--but we'll make it, all
right."

Like the pintos, Mary Hope was too astonished to rebel. She got in.

The team went plunging up the hill, snorting now and then, swerving
sharply away from rock or bush that threatened them with vague horrors
in the clear starlight. Behind them surged the clamor of many voices
shouting, the confused scuffling of feet, a revolver shot or two, and
threading the whole the shrill, upbraiding voice of a woman.

"That's Mrs. Miller," Mary Hope volunteered jerkily. "She's the one
that was scalded."

"It wasn't her tongue that was hurt," Lance observed, and barely saved
the buckboard from upsetting on a rock as Rosa and Subrosa shied
violently and simultaneously at a rabbit scuttling from a bush before
them.

He swung the pintos to the right, jounced down into some sort of
trail, and let them go loping along at their usual pace.

"Belle has her own ideas about horse-training," Lance chuckled,
steadying Subrosa with a twitch of the rein. "They'll hit this gait
all the way to your ranch."

Mary Hope gave a gasp and caught him by the arm, shaking it a little
as if she were afraid that otherwise he would not listen to her. "Oh,
but I canna go home! I've a horse and my riding clothes in Jumpoff,
and I must go for them and come home properly on horseback to-morrow!
It's because of the lie I told my mother, so that I could come to the
dance with the Kennedys. Set me down here anywhere, Lance Lorrigan,
and let me walk until the Kennedys overtake me! They'll be coming
soon, now--as soon as Bill Kennedy gets licket sober. You can stop the
horses--surely you can stop them and let me out. But please, _please_
do not take me home to-night, in this party dress--and a coat that
isna mine at all!"

"I'm not taking you home, girl. I'm taking you to Jumpoff. And it
won't matter to you whether Bill Kennedy is licked sober or not. And
to-morrow I'll find out who owns the coat. I'll say I found it on the
road somewhere. Who's to prove I didn't? Or if you disapprove of lying
about it, I'll bring it back and leave it beside the road."

"It's a lot of trouble I'm making for you," said Mary Hope quite
meekly, and let go his arm. "I should not have told the lie and gone
to the dance. And I canna wear my own coat home, because it's there
in the pile behind the door, and some one else will take it. So after
all it will be known that I lied, and you may as well take me home now
and let me face it."

To this Lance made no reply. But when the pintos came rattling down
the hill to where the Douglas trail led away to the right, he did not
slow them, did not take the turn.

Mary Hope looked anxiously toward home, away beyond the broken
skyline. A star hung big and bright on the point of a certain hill
that marked the Douglas ranch. While she watched it, the star slid out
of sight as if it were going down to warn Hugh Douglas that his
daughter had told a lie and had gone to a forbidden place to dance
with forbidden people, and was even now driving through the night with
one of the Lorrigans,--perchance the wickedest of all the wicked
Lorrigans, because he had been away beyond the Rim and had learned the
wickedness of the cities.

She looked wistfully at the face of this wickedest of the Lorrigans,
his profile seen dimly in the starlight. He did not look wicked. Under
his hat brim she could see his brows, heavy and straight and lifted
whimsically at the inner points, as though he were thinking of
something amusing. His nose was fine and straight, too,--not at all
like a beak, though her father had always maintained that the
Lorrigans were but human vultures. His mouth,--there was something in
the look of his mouth that made her catch her breath; something
tender, something that vaguely disturbed her, made her feel that it
could be terribly stern if it were not so tender. He seemed to be
smiling--not with his mouth, exactly, but away inside of his mind--and
the smile showed just a little bit, at the corner of his lips. His
chin was the Lorrigan chin absolutely; a nice chin to look at, with a
little, long dimple down the middle. A chin that one would not want to
oppose, would not want to see when the man who owned it was very
angry.

Mary Hope had gone just so far in her analysis when Lance turned his
head abruptly, unexpectedly, and looked full into her eyes.

"Don't be afraid, girl. Don't worry about the lie--about anything. It
was a sweet little lie--it makes you just human and young and--sweet.
Let them scold you, and smile, 'way down deep in your heart, and be
glad you're human enough to tell a lie now and then. Because if you
hadn't, we wouldn't be driving all these miles together to save you a
little of the scolding. Be happy. Be just a little bit happy to-night,
won't you, girl--you lonely little girl--with the blue, blue eyes!"

There it was again, that vibrant, caressing note in his voice. It was
there in his eyes while he looked at her, on his lips while he spoke
to her. But the next moment he looked ahead at the trail, spoke to
Rosa who had flung her head around to bite pettishly at Subrosa, who
snapped back at her.

Mary Hope turned her face to the starlit rangeland. Again she breathed
quickly, fought back tears, fought the feeling that she had been
kissed. All through the silent ride that followed she fought the
feeling, knew that it was foolish, that Lance knew nothing whatever
about that look, that tone which so affected her. He did not speak
again. He sat beside her, and she felt that he was thinking about her,
felt that his heart was making love to her--hated herself fiercely for
the feeling, fought it and felt it just the same.

"It's just a way he has with him!" she told herself bitterly, when he
swung the team up in front of the section house and helped her down.
"He'd have the same way with him if he spoke to a--a rabbit! He doesna
mean it--he doesna know and he doesna care!"

"Thank you, Mr. Lorrigan. It was very kind of you to bring me." Her
voice was prim and very Scotch, and gave no hint of all she had been
thinking.

"I'm always kind--to myself," laughed Lance, and lifted his hat and
drove away.




CHAPTER FOURTEEN

IN WHICH LANCE FINISHES ONE JOB


In the Traffic saloon, whither Lance had gone to find a fire and an
easy chair and something cheering to drink while he waited for the
pinto team to rest and eat, he found a sleepy bartender sprawled
before the stove, a black-and-white dog stretched flat on its side and
growling while it dreamed, and an all-pervading odor of alcoholic
beverages that appealed to him.

"A highball would make me happy, right now," he announced cheerfully,
standing over the bartender, rubbing his fingers numbed from the keen
air and from holding in the pintos, to which a slackened pull on the
bits meant a tacit consent to a headlong run.

"Been to the dance?" The bartender yawned widely and went to mix the
highball. "I been kinda waitin' up--but shucks! No tellin' when the
crowd'll git in--not if they drink all they took with 'em."

"They were working hard to do just that when I left." Lance stood back
to the stove. Having left in a hurry, without his overcoat, he was
chilled to the bone, though the night had been mild for that time of
the year. He hoped that the girl had not been uncomfortable--and
yawned while the thought held him. He drank his highball, warmed
himself comfortably and then, with some one's fur overcoat for a
blanket, he disposed his big body on a near-by pool table, never
dreaming that Mary Hope Douglas was remembering his tone, his words,
his silence even; analyzing, weighing, wondering how much he had
meant, or how little,--wondering whether she really hated him, whether
she might justly call her ponderings by any name save curiosity. Such
is the way of women the world over.

What Lance thought does not greatly matter. Such is the way of men
that their thoughts sooner or later crystallize into action. The
bartender would tell you that he went straight to sleep, with the fur
coat pulled up over his ears and his legs uncovered, his modishly-shod
feet extending beyond the end of the table. The bartender dozed in his
chair, thinking it not worth while to close up, because the dance
crowd might come straying in at any time with much noise and a great
thirst, to say nothing of the possibility of thirsty men coming on the
midnight freight that was always four or five hours late, and was now
much overdue.

The freight arrived. Three men entered the saloon, drank whisky,
talked for a few minutes and departed. The bartender took a long,
heat-warped poker and attacked the red clinkers in the body of the
stove, threw in a bucket of fresh coal, used the poker with good
effect on the choked draft beneath, and went back to his chair and his
dozing.

During the clamor of the fire-building Lance turned over, drawing up
his feet and straightway extending them again; making a sleepy, futile
clutch at the fur coat, that had slipped off his shoulders when he
turned. The bartender reached out and flung the coat up on Lance's
shoulders, and bit off a chew of tobacco and stowed it away in his
cheek. Presently he dozed again.

Dawn seeped in through the windows. Lance, lying flat on his stomach
with his face on his folded arms, slept soundly. The unpainted
buildings across the street became visible in the gloomy, lifeless
gray of a sunless morning. With the breeze that swept a flurry of gray
dust and a torn newspaper down the street, came the rattle of a wagon,
the sound of voices mingled in raucous, incoherent wrangling.

"They're comin'," yawned the bartender, glancing at the sleeper on the
pool table. "Better wake up; they're comin' pickled and fighty,
judgin' by the sound."

Lance sighed, turned his face away from the light and slept on,
untroubled by the nearing tumult.

Galloping horses came first, _ka-lup, ka-lup, ka-lup_, a sharp
staccato on the frosted earth. The rattle of the wagon ceased,
resumed, stopped outside the saloon. Other galloping horsemen came up
and stopped. The door was flung open violently, letting in men with
unfinished sentences hot on their tongues.

"Next time a Lorrigan dance comes off--"

"What I'd a done, woulda--"

"Fix them damn Lorrigans!"

Detached phrases, no one man troubling to find a listener, the words
came jumbled to the ears of Lance, who fancied himself in the
bunk-house at home, with the boys just in from a ride somewhere. He
was wriggling into a freshly uncomfortable posture on the table when
the fur coat was pulled off him, letting the daylight suddenly into
his eyes as his brain emerged from the fog of sleep.

"And here's the--guy that run away from me!" Bill Kennedy jerked off
his hat and brought it down with a slap on Lance's face. "Run off to
town, by jiminy, and hid! Run--"

Half asleep as he was--rather, just shocked awake--Lance heaved
himself off the table and landed one square blow on Bill Kennedy's
purple jaw. Bill staggered, caught himself and came back, arms up and
fists guarding his face. Lance disentangled his feet from the fur
coat, kicked it out of his way and struck again just as Kennedy was
slugging at him.

At the bar the long line of men whirled, glasses in hand, to watch the
fight. But it did not last long. Kennedy was drunk, and Lance was not.
So presently Kennedy was crawling on his knees amongst some overturned
chairs, and Lance was facing the crowd, every inch of him itching to
fight.

"Who was it said he was going to fix them damn Lorrigans?" he
demanded, coming at them warily. "I'm not packing a gun, but I'd like
to lick a few of you fellows that tried to rough-house the dance I
gave. Didn't cost you a cent; music, supper, everything furnished for
you folks to have a good time--and the way you had it was to wreck the
place like the rotten-souled hoodlums you are. Now, who is it wants to
fix the damn Lorrigans?"

"Me, for one; what yuh go'n take my girl away from me for?" a flushed
youth cried, and flung the dregs of his whisky glass at Lance. There
was not more than a half teaspoon in the glass, but the intent was
plain enough.

Lance walked up and knocked that young man staggering half across the
room, slapped with the flat of his hand another who leered at him,
whirled to meet some one who struck him a glancing blow on the ear,
and flung him after the first.

"You're all of you drunk--it's a one-sided fight all the way through,"
he cried, parrying a blow from Kennedy, who had gotten to his feet and
came at him again mouthing obscenity. "But I'll lick you, if you
insist."

His coat had hampered him until it obligingly slit up the back. He
wriggled out of the two halves, tore off his cuffs, and went after the
crowd with his bare fists. Some one lifted a chair threateningly, and
Lance seized it and sent it crashing through a window. Some one else
threw a beer mug, but he ducked in time and broke a knuckle on the
front teeth of the thrower. He saw a gap in the teeth, saw the man
edge out of the fray spitting blood while he made for the door, and
felt that the blow was worth a broken knuckle.

It was not a pretty fight. Such fights never are pretty. Lance himself
was not a pretty sight, when he had finished. There had been
shooting--but even in Jumpoff one hesitated to shoot down an unarmed
man, so that the bar fixtures suffered most. Lance came out of it with
a fragment of shirt hanging down his chest like a baby's bib, a cut
lip that bled all over his chin, a cheek skinned and swelling rapidly,
the bad knuckle and the full flavor of victory.

The saloon looked as though cattle had been driven through it. Bill
Kennedy lay sprawled over a card table, whimpering inarticulately
because he had lost his gun at the dance. The flushed youth who had
rashly claimed Mary Hope as his girl was outside with a washbasin
trying to stop his nose from bleeding. Others were ministering to
their hurts as best they might, muttering the thoughts that they dared
not express aloud.

Lance looked up from examination of his knuckle, caressed his cut lip
with the tip of his tongue, pulled the fragment of shirt down as far
as possible, gently rubbed his swelling cheek, and turned to the
bartender.

"I never licked a man yet and sent him home thirsty," he said. "Set it
out for the boys--and give me another highball. Then if you'll lend me
a coat and a pair of gloves, I'll go home."

Peace was ratified in whisky drunk solemnly. Lance paid, and turned to
go. One of the vanquished wabbled up to him and held out his hand to
shake.

"You damn Lorrigans, you got us comin' and goin'," he complained, "but
shake, anyway. I'm Irish meself, and I know a rale fight when I see
it. What we didn't git at the dance before we left, by heavins you
give us when we got into town--so I'm one that's game to say it was a
fine dance and not a dull momint anywhere!"

"That's something," Lance grinned wryly and wriggled into the fur
overcoat which the bartender generously lent him. He rejected the
gloves when he found that his hands were puffed and painful, and went
out to find breakfast.

Over a thick white cup of dubious coffee and a plate of sticky
hot-cakes he meditated glumly on the general unappreciativeness of the
world in general, and of the Black Rim in particular. What had
happened at the schoolhouse he could only surmise, but from certain
fragmentary remarks he had overheard he guessed that the schoolhouse
probably had suffered as much as the saloon. Black Rim, it would seem,
was determined that the Lorrigans should go on living up to their
reputations, however peacefully inclined the Lorrigans might be.

Two disquieting thoughts he took with him to the stable when he went
after the pinto team: Mary Hope would say that it was not a pleasant
surprise which he had given her at Cottonwood Spring. And Belle,--he
was not at all sure whether he was too big for Belle's quirt to find
the tender places on his legs, but he was very sure that the Irishman
spoke the truth. There would still be no dull moments for Lance when
he confronted the owner of that pinto team.




CHAPTER FIFTEEN

HE TACKLES ANOTHER


Much to the disgust of Rosa and Subrosa, their new driver turned them
from the main trail just as they were beginning to climb joyously the
first grade of Devil's Tooth Ridge. Rosa and Subrosa were subdued,
plainly resentful of their subjection, and fretting to be in their own
stalls. Belle they could and did bully to a certain extent. They loved
to fight things out with Belle, they never missed an opportunity for
"acting up"--yet this morning they had been afraid to do more than nag
at each other with bared teeth; afraid to lope when this big man said,
"Hey--settle down, there!" with a grating kind of calm that carried
with it a new and unknown menace.

Some one had exuberantly fired the Whipple shack, and the pintos
wanted to whirl short around in their tracks when they saw the smoking
embers. They had wanted to bolt straight out across the rocky upland
and splinter the doubletree, and perhaps smash a wheel or two, and
then stand and kick gleefully at the wreck. If head-shakings and
flattened ears meant anything, Rosa and Subrosa were two disgruntled
pintos that morning. They had not dared do more than cut a small
half-circle out of the trail when they passed the blackened spot that
had been the Whipple shack.

Now they turned down the rocky, half-formed trail to Cottonwood
Spring, reluctantly but with no more than a half-hearted kick from
Subrosa to register their disgust. And to that Lance gave no heed
whatever. He did not so much as twitch a rein or yell a threat. He
drove surely--with one hand mostly because of the broken knuckle,
which was painful in the extreme--ignoring the pintos for the most
part.

He was meditating rather gloomily upon the innate cussedness of human
nature as it was developed in Black Rim Country. He was thinking of
Mary Hope--a little; of her eyes, that were so obstinately blue, so
antagonistically blue, and then, quite unexpectedly, so wistfully
blue; of her voice, that dropped quite as unexpectedly into pure
Scottish melody; of her primness, that sometimes was not prim at all,
but quaintly humorous, or wistfully shy.

He was thinking more often of the dance that had started out so well
and had ended--Lord knew how, except that it ended in a fight. He
remembered striking, in that saloon, faces that had been pummeled
before ever he sent a jab their way. There had been eyes already
closed behind purple, puffy curtains of bruised flesh. He had fought
animosity that was none of his creating.

Thinking of the fight, he thought of the wrecked saloon when the fight
was over. Thinking of the wrecked saloon led him to think of the
probable condition of the nice new schoolhouse. Thinking of that
brought him back to Mary Hope,--to her face as it looked when she rode
up to the place on Monday morning. Ride up to it she must, if she
meant to go on teaching, for there was no more Whipple shack.

"Rotten bunch of rough-necks," he summed up the men of Black Rim and
of Jumpoff. "And they'll blame the Devil's Tooth outfit--they'll say
the Lorrigans did it. Oh, well--heck!"

So he drove down into the hollow, tied the pintos to the post where
they stood the night before, crawled through the wire fence where Mary
Hope had left a small three-cornered fragment of the coat that "wasna"
hers at all, and went over to the schoolhouse, standing forlorn in the
trampled yard with broken sandwiches and bits of orange peel and empty
whisky flasks accentuating the unsightliness and disorder.

The door swung half open. The floor was scored, grimy with dirt
tracked in on heedless feet and ground into the wax that had been
liberally scattered over it to make the boards smooth for dancing. A
window was broken,--by some one's elbow or by a pistol shot, Lance
guessed. The planks placed along the wall on boxes to form seats were
pulled askew, the stovepipe had been knocked down and lay disjointed
and battered in a corner. It was not, in Lance's opinion, a pleasant
little surprise for the girl with the Scotch blue eyes.

He pulled the door shut, picked up the empty whisky flasks and threw
them, one after the other, as far as he could send them into a rocky
gulch where Mary Hope would not be likely to go. Then he recrossed the
enclosure, crawled through the fence, untied the pintos and drove
home.

The bunk house emanated a pronounced odor of whisky and bad air, and
much snoring, just as Lance expected. The horses dozed in the corral
or tossed listlessly their trampled hay; the house was quiet, deserted
looking, with the doors all closed and the blinds down in the windows
of the room that had been the birthplace of Belle's three boys.

Lance knew that every one would be asleep to-day. The Devil's Tooth
ranch had always slept through the day after a dance, with certain
yawning intermissions at mealtimes.

He unhitched the pintos, turned them loose in the corral, caught his
own horse, which one of the boys must have led home, and tied it to a
post. From the chuck-wagon, standing just where Riley had driven it to
a vacant spot beside the woodpile, Lance purloined a can of pork and
beans, a loaf of bread, and some butter. These things he put in a
bag.

For a minute he stood scowling at the silent house, undecided,
wondering just how soundly Belle was sleeping. He was not afraid of
Belle; no real Lorrigan was ever afraid of anything, as fear is
usually defined. But he wanted to postpone for a time her reckoning
with him. He wanted to face her when he had a free mind, when she had
slept well, when her temper was not so edgy. He wanted other things,
however, and he proceeded to get those things with the least effort
and delay.

He wanted soft cloths. On the clothesline dangled three undershirts,
three pair of drawers and several mismated socks. The shirts and
drawers were of the kind known as fleece-lined--which means that they
are fuzzy on the inside. They were Riley's complete wardrobe so far as
underwear went, but Lance did not trouble himself with unimportant
details. He took them all, because he had a swift mental picture of
the schoolhouse floor which would need much scrubbing before it would
be clean.

He was ready to mount and ride away when he remembered something else
that he would need. "Lye!" he muttered, and retraced his steps to the
house. Now he must go into the kitchen shed for what he wanted, and
Riley slept in a little room next the shed. But Riley was snoring
with a perfect rhythm that bespoke a body sunk deep in slumber, so
Lance searched until he found what he wanted, and added a full box of
a much-advertised washing powder for good measure. He was fairly well
burdened when he finally started up the trail again, but he believed
that he had everything that he would need, even a lump of putty, and a
pane of glass which he had carefully removed from a window of the
chicken house, and which he hoped would fit.

You may think that he rode gladly upon his errand; that the thought of
Mary Hope turned the work before him into a labor of love. It did not.
Lance Lorrigan was the glummest young man in the whole Black Rim, and
there was much glumness amongst the Rim folk that day, let me tell
you. He ached from fighting, from dancing, from sleeping on the pool
table, from hanging for hours to those darned pintos. His left hand
was swollen, and pains from the knuckle streaked like hot wires to his
elbow and beyond. His lips were sore--so sore he could not even swear
with any comfort--and even the pulling together of his black eyebrows
hurt his puffed cheek. And he never had scrubbed a floor in his life,
and knew that he was going to hate the work even worse than he hated
the men who had made the scrubbing necessary.

While he went up the Slide trail he wished that he had never thought
of giving a dance. He wished he had gone down to Los Angeles for his
Easter holiday, as one of his pals had implored him to do. He wished
Mary Hope would quit teaching school; what did she want to stay in the
Black Rim for, anyway? Why didn't she get out where she could amount
to something?

If there were any caressing cadences in the voice of Lance Lorrigan,
any provocative tilt to his eyebrows, any tenderness in his smile,
anything enigmatical in his personality, none of these things were
apparent when he set the first bucket of water on the stove to heat.
He had added to his charms a broad streak of soot across his forehead
and a scratch on his neck, acquired while putting up the stovepipe. He
had set his lip to bleeding because he forgot that it was cut, and
drew it sharply between his teeth when the stovepipe fell apart just
when he was sure it was up to stay. He had invented two new
cuss-words. What he had not done was weaken in his determination to
make that small schoolhouse a pleasant surprise for Mary Hope.

He did the work thoroughly, though a woman might have pointed out wet
corners and certain muddy splashes on the wall. He lost all count of
the buckets of water that he carried from the spring, and it occurred
to him that Mary Hope would need a new broom, for the one Belle had
provided was worn down to a one-sided wisp that reminded him of the
beard of a billy goat. He used two cans of condensed lye and all of
the washing powder, and sneezed himself too weak too swear over the
fine cloud of acrid dust that filled his nostrils when he sprinkled
the powder on the floor. But the floor was clean when he finished, and
so was the platform outside.

Of Riley's underwear there was left the leg of one pair of drawers,
which Lance reserved for dusting the desks and the globe that had by
some miracle escaped. While the floor was drying he took out the
broken windowpane, discovered that the one from the chicken house was
too short, and cut his thumb while he chipped off a piece of glass
from the other to fill the space. He did not make a very good job of
it. To hold the glass in place, he used shingle nails, which he had to
hunt for on the ground where they had dropped from the roof during
shingling, and when they had been driven into the frame--with the
handle of the screwdriver--they showed very plainly from the inside.
Then the putty did not seem to want to stick anywhere, but kept
crumbling off in little lumps. So Lance threw the putty at a gopher
that was standing up nibbling one of Riley's sandwiches, and went
after the desks.

These took some time to unwrap and carry into place. There were only
twelve, but Lance would have sworn before a jury that he carried at
least fifty single desks into the schoolhouse that afternoon, and
screwed them to the floor, and unscrewed them because the darned
things did not line up straight when viewed from the teacher's desk,
and he had a vivid impression that blue, blue eyes can be very
critical over such things as a crooked line of desks!

Perhaps it was because his head ached splittingly and his injured hand
throbbed until it was practically useless; at any rate the cleaning of
the schoolhouse, especially the placing of the desks, became fixed
afterward in his memory as the biggest, the most disagreeable incident
in his whole vacation.

At four-thirty however the task was accomplished. At the spring, Lance
scrubbed the water bucket clean, washed the dipper, placed them behind
the door. He got wearily into the borrowed fur coat, took a last
comprehensive survey of the room from the doorway, went back to erase
certain sentences scrawled on the blackboard by some would-be
humorist, took another look at the work of his aching hands, and went
away with the coffeepot in his hand and the screwdriver showing its
battered wooden handle from the top of his pocket. He was too tired to
feel any glow of accomplishment, any great joy in the thought of Mary
Hope's pleasure. He was not even sure that she would feel any
pleasure.

His chief emotion was a gloomy satisfaction in knowing that the place
was once more presentable, that it was ready for Mary Hope to hang up
her hat and ring her little bell and start right in teaching. That
what the Lorrigans had set out to do, the Lorrigans had done.

At the ranch he found Riley at the bunk house wrangling with the boys
over his lost wardrobe. In Riley's opinion it was a darned poor idea
of a darned poor joke, and it took a darned poor man to perpetrate it.
Lance's arrival scarcely interrupted the jangle of voices. The boys
had bruises of their own to nurse, and they had scant sympathy for
Riley, and they told him so.

Lance went into the house. He supposed he would have to replace
Riley's clothes, which he did, very matter-of-factly and without any
comment whatever, restitution being in this case a mere matter of
sorting out three suits of his own underwear, which were much better
than Riley's, and placing them on the cook's bed.

"That you, Lance? Where in the world have you been all this while? I
came mighty near going gunning after the man that stole my team, let
me tell you--and I would have, if Tom hadn't found your horse tied up
to the fence and guessed you'd gone to take Mary Hope home. But I must
say, honey, you never followed any short cut!"

This was much easier than Lance had expected, so he made shift to
laugh, though it hurt his lip cruelly. "Had to take her to Jumpoff,
Belle. Then I had to clean up that crowd of toughs that--"

"You cleaned up Tom's leavin's, then!" Belle made grim comment through
Lance's closed door. "I didn't think there was enough left of 'em to
lick, by the time our boys got through. Haven't you been to bed yet,
for heaven's sake!"

"I'm going to bed," mumbled Lance, "when I've had a bath and a meal.
And to-morrow, Belle, I think I'll hit the trail for 'Frisco. Hope you
don't mind if I leave a few days early. I've got to stop off anyway to
see a fellow in Reno I promised--any hot water handy?"

There was a perceptible pause before Belle answered, and then it was
not about the bath water. She would not have been Belle Lorrigan
if she had permitted a quiver in her voice, yet it made Lance
thoughtful.

"Honey, I don't blame you for going. I expect we are awful rough--and
you'd notice it, coming from civilized folks. But--you know, don't
you, that the Lorrigans never spoiled your party for you? It--it just
happened that the Jumpoff crowd brought whisky out from town. We
_tried_ to make it pleasant--and it won't happen again--"

"Bless your heart!" Clad with superb simplicity in a bathrobe, Lance
appeared unexpectedly and gathered her into his arms. "If you think
I'm getting so darn civilized I can't stay at home, take a look at me!
By heck, Belle, I'll bet there isn't a man in the whole Black Rim that
got as much fun out of that scrap as I did! But I've got to _go_." He
patted her reassuringly on the head, laid his good cheek against hers
for a minute and turned abruptly away into his own room. He closed the
door and stood absent-mindedly feeling his swollen hand. "I've got to
go," he repeated under his breath. "I might get foolish if I stayed.
Darned if I'll make a fool of myself over any girl!"




CHAPTER SIXTEEN

ABOUT A PIANO


In the lazy hour just after a satisfying dinner, Lance stood leaning
over an end of the piano, watching Belle while she played--he listened
and smoked a cigarette and looked as though he hadn't a thing on his
mind.

"I remember you used to sing that a lot for the little Douglas girl,"
he observed idly. "She used to sit and look at you--my word, but her
eyes were the bluest, the lonesomest eyes I ever saw! She seemed to
think you were next to angels when you sang. I saw it in her face, but
I was too much of a kid then to know what it was." He lighted a fresh
cigarette, placed it between Belle's lips so that she need not stop
playing while she smoked, and laughed as if he were remembering
something funny.

"She always looked so horrified when she saw you smoking," he said.
"And so adoring when you sang, and so lonesome when she had to ride
away. She was a queer kid--and she's just as unexpected now--just as
Scotch. Didn't you find her that way, dad?"

"She was Scotch enough," Tom mumbled from his chair by the fire.
"Humpin' hyenas! She was like handlin' a wildcat!"

"The poor kid never did have a chance to be human," said Belle, and
ceased playing for a moment. "Good heavens, how she did enjoy the two
hours I gave her at the piano! She's got the makings of a musician, if
she could keep at it."

"We-ell--" Having artfully led Belle to this point, Lance quite as
artfully edged away from it. "You gave her all the chance you could.
And she ought to be able to go on, if she wants to. I suppose old
Scotty's human enough to get her something to play on."

"Him? _Human!_" Tom shifted in his chair. "If pianos could breed and
increase into a herd, and he could ship a carload every fall, Scotty
might spend a few dollars on one."

"It's a darned shame," Belle exclaimed, dropping her fingers to the
keys again. "Mary Hope just _starves_ for everything that makes life
worth living. And that old devil--"

"Say--don't make me feel like a great, overgrown money-hog," Lance
protested. "A girl starving for music, because she hasn't a piano to
play on. And a piano costs, say, three or four hundred dollars. Of
course, we've got the money to buy one--I suppose I could dig up the
price myself. I was thinking I'd stake our schoolhouse to a library.
That's something it really needs. But a piano--I wish you hadn't said
anything about starving. I know I'd hate to go hungry for music,
but--"

"Well, humpin' hyenas! I'll buy the girl a piano. I guess it won't
break the outfit to pay out a few more dollars, now we've started.
We're outlaws, anyway--might as well add one more crime to the list.
Only, it don't go to the Douglas shack--it goes into the schoolhouse.
Lance, you go ahead and pick out some books and ship 'em on to the
ranch, and I'll see they get over there. Long as we've started fixin'
up a school, we may as well finish the job up right. By Henry, I'll
show the Black Rim that there ain't anything small about the
Lorrigans, anyway!"

"Dad, I think you're showin' yourself a real sport," Lance laughed.
"We-ell, if you're game to buy a piano, I'm game to buy books. We
staked Black Rim to a school, so we'll do the job right. And by the
way, Belle, if you're going to get me to Jumpoff in time for that
evening train, don't you think it's about time you started?"

That is how it happened that Mary Hope walked into the schoolhouse one
Monday and found a very shiny new piano standing across one corner of
the room where the light was best. On the top was a pile of music. In
another corner of the room stood a bookcase and fifty volumes; she
counted them in her prim, frugal way that she had learned from her
mother. They were books evidently approved by some Board of Education
for school libraries, and did not interest her very much. Not when a
piano stood in the other corner.

She was early, so she opened it and ran her fingers over the keys. She
knew well enough who had brought it there, and her mouth was pressed
into a straight line, her eyes were troubled.

The Lorrigans--always the Lorrigans! Why did they do these things when
no one expected goodness or generosity from them? Why had they built
the schoolhouse--and then given a dance where every one got drunk and
the whole thing ended in a fight? Every one said it was the Lorrigans
who had brought the whisky. Some one told her they had a five-gallon
keg of it in the shed behind the schoolhouse, and she thought it must
be true, the way all the men had acted. And why had they burned the
Whipple shack and all the school books, so that she could not have
school until more books were bought?--an expense which the Swedes, at
least, could ill afford.

Why had Lance taken her to Jumpoff, away from the fighting, and then
gone straight to the saloon and gotten so drunk that he fought every
one in town before he left in the morning? Why had he never come near
her again? And now that he was back in California, why did he ignore
her completely, and never send so much as a picture postal to show
that he gave her a thought now and then?

Mary Hope would not play the piano that day. She was more stern than
usual with her pupils, and would not so much as answer them when they
asked her where the piano and all the books had come from. Which was a
foolish thing to do, since the four Boyle children were keen enough to
guess, and sure to carry the news home, and to embellish the truth in
true range-gossip style.

Mary Hope fully decided that she would have the piano hauled back to
the Lorrigans. Later, she was distressed because she could think of no
one who would take the time or the trouble to perform the duty, and a
piano she had to admit is not a thing you can tie behind the cantle of
your saddle, or carry under your arm. The books were a different
matter. They were for the school. But the piano--well, the piano was
for Mary Hope Douglas, and Mary Hope Douglas did not mean to be
patronized in this manner by Lance Lorrigan or any of his kin.

But she was a music-hungry little soul, and that night after she was
sure that the children had ridden up over the basin's brim and were
out of hearing, Mary Hope sat down and began to play. When she began
to play she began to cry, though she was hardly conscious of her
tears. She seemed to hear Lance Lorrigan again, saying, "Don't be
lonely, you girl. Take the little pleasant things that come--" She
wondered, in a whispery, heart-achey way, if he had meant the piano
when he said that. If he had meant--just a piano, and a lot of books
for school!

The next thing that she realized was that the light was growing dim,
and that her throat was aching, and that she was playing over and over
a lovesong that had the refrain:

         "Come back to me, sweetheart, and love me as before--
         Come back to me, sweetheart, and leave me nevermore!"

Which was perfectly imbecile, a song she had always hated because of
its sickly sentimentality. She had no sweetheart, and having none, she
certainly did not want him back. But she admitted that there was a
certain melodious swing to the tune, and that her fingers had probably
strayed into the rhythm of it while she was thinking of something
totally different.

The next day she played a little at noontime for the children, and
when school was over she played for two hours. And the next day after
that slipped away--she really had meant to ride over to the AJ, or
send a note by the children, asking Jim Boyle if he could please
remove the piano and saying that she felt it was too expensive a gift
for the school to accept from the Lorrigans.

On the third day she really did send a prim little note to Jim Boyle,
and she received a laconic reply, wholly characteristic of the Black
Rim's attitude toward the Devil's Tooth outfit.

  "Take all you can git and git all you can without going to jale.
  That's what the Lorrigans are doing, Yrs truly,

                                                      "J. A. Boyle."

It was useless to ask her father. She had known that all along. When
Alexander Douglas slipped the collars up on the necks of his horses,
he must see where money would be gained from the labor. And there was
no money for the Douglas pocket in hauling a piano down the Devil's
Tooth Ridge.

But the whole Black Rim was talking about it. Mary Hope felt sure that
they were saying ill-natured things behind her back. Never did she
meet man or woman but the piano was mentioned. Sometimes she was
asked, with meaning smiles, how she had come to stand in so well with
the Devil's Tooth. She knew that they were all gossiping of how Lance
Lorrigan had taken her home from the dance, with Belle Lorrigan's
bronco team. She had been obliged to return a torn coat to Mrs.
Miller, and to receive her own and a long lecture on the wisdom of
choosing one's company with some care. She had been obliged to beg
Mrs. Miller not to mention the matter to her parents, and the word had
gone round, and had reached Mother Douglas--and you can imagine how
pleasant that made home for Mary Hope.

Because she was lonely, and no one seemed willing to take it away, she
kept the piano. She played it, and while she played she wept because
the Rim folk simply would not understand how little she wanted the
Lorrigans to do things for her. And then, one day, she hit upon a plan
of redeeming herself, for regaining the self-respect she felt was
slipping from her with every day that the piano stood in the
schoolhouse.

She would give a series of dances--they would be orderly, well-behaved
dances, with no refreshments stronger than coffee and lemonade!--and
she would sell tickets, and invite every one she knew, and beg them to
come and help to pay for the school piano.

Even her mother approved that plan, though she did not approve dances.
"But the folk are that sinfu' they canna bide wi' any pleasure save
the hoppin' aboot wi' their arms around the waist of a woman," she
sighed. "A church social wad be far more tae my liking, Hope--if we
had only a church!"

"Well, since there isn't any church, and people won't go to anything
but a dance, I shall have to get the money with dances," Mary Hope
replied with some asperity. The subject was beginning to wear her
nerves. "Pay for it I shall, if it takes all my teacher's salary for
five years! I wish the Lorrigans had minded their own business. I've
heard nothing but piano ever since it came there. I hate the
Lorrigans! Sometimes I almost hate the piano."

"Ye shud hae thought on all that before ye accepit a ride home wi'
young Lance, wi' a coat ye didna own on your back, and disobedience in
your heart. 'Tis the worst of them a' ye chose to escort ye, Hope, and
if he thought he could safely presume to gi' ye a present like yon
piano, ye hae but yersel' tae blame for it."

"He didn't give it!" cried Mary Hope, her eyes ablaze with resentment.
"He wasna here when it came. I havena heard from him and I dinna want
to hear from him. It was Belle Lorrigan gave the piano, as I've said a
million times. And I shall pay for it--"

"Not from your ain pocket will ye pay. Ye can give the dance--and if
ye make it the Fourth of July, with a picnic in the grove, and a dance
in the schoolhouse afterwards, 'tis possible Jeanie may come up from
Pocatello wi' friends--and twa dollars wad no be too much to ask for a
day and a night of entertainment."

"Well, mother! When you do--" Mary Hope bit her tongue upon the
remainder of the sentence. She had very nearly told her mother that
when she did choose to be human she had a great head for business.

It was a fine, practical idea, and Mary Hope went energetically about
its development. She consulted Mrs. Kennedy. Mrs. Kennedy also had
friends in Pocatello, and she obligingly gave the names of them all.
She strongly advised written invitations, with a ticket enclosed and
the price marked plainly. She said it was a crying shame the way the
Lorrigans had conducted their dance, and that Mary Hope ought to be
very careful and not include any of that rough bunch in this dance.

"Look how that young devil, Lance Lorrigan, abused my Bill, right
before everybody!" she cited, shifting her youngest child, who was
teething, to her hip that she might gesticulate more freely. "And look
how they all piled into our crowd and beat 'em up! Great way to
do--give a dance and then beat up the folks that come to it! And look
at what Lance done right here in town--as if it wasn't enough, what
they done out there! Bill's got a crick in his back yet, where Lance
knocked him over the edge of a card table. You pay 'em for the piano,
Hope; I'll help yuh scare up a crowd. But don't you have none of the
Lorrigans, or there'll be trouble sure!"

Mary Hope flushed. "I could hardly ask the Lorrigans to come and help
pay for their own present," she pointed out in her prim tone. "I had
never intended to ask the Lorrigans."

"Well, maybe not. But if you did ask them, I know lots of folks that
wouldn't go a step--and my Bill's one," said Mrs. Kennedy.

So much depends upon one's point of view. Black Rim gossip, which
persisted in linking Mary Hope's name with Lance Lorrigan, grinned
among themselves while they mentioned the piano, the schoolhouse, and
the library as evidence of Lance's being "stuck on her." The Boyle
children had frequently tattled to Mary Hope what they heard at home.
Lance had done it all because he was in love with her.

Denial did not mend matters, even if Mary Hope's pride had not
rebelled against protesting that the gossip was not true. Lance
Lorrigan was not in love with her. Over and over she told herself so,
fiercely and with much attention to evidence which she considered
convincing. Only twice she had seen him in the two weeks of his visit.
Once he had come to mend the lock his father had broken, and he had
taken her home from the dance because of the fighting. Never had he
made love to her.... Here she would draw a long breath and wonder a
little, and afterwards shake her head and say to herself that he
thought no more of her than of Jennie Miller. He--he just had a way
with him.

Mary Hope's point of view was, I think, justifiable. Leaving out the
intolerable implication that Lance had showered benefits upon her, she
felt that the Lorrigans had been over-generous. The schoolhouse and
the books might be accepted as a public-spirited effort to do their
part. But the piano, since it had not been returned, must be paid for.
And it seemed to Mary Hope that the Lorrigans themselves would deeply
resent being invited to a dance openly given for the purpose of
raising money to repay them. It would never do; she could not ask them
to come.

Moreover, if the Lorrigans came there would be trouble, whether there
was whisky or not. At the house-warming dance the Lorrigans had
practically cleaned out the crowd and sent them home long before
daylight. There had been no serious shooting--the Lorrigans had fought
with their fists and had somehow held the crowd back from the
danger-line of gun-play. But Mary Hope feared there would be a killing
the next time that the Jumpoff crowd and the Lorrigans came together.

She tried to be just, but she had heard only one side of the
affair,--which was not the Lorrigan side. Whispers had long been going
round among the Black Rim folk; sinister whispers that had to do with
cattle and horses that had disappeared mysteriously from the Rim
range. Mary Hope could not help hearing the whispers, could not help
wondering if underneath them there was a basis of truth. Her father
still believed, in spite of Tom's exoneration, that his spotty
yearling had gone down the gullets of Devil's Tooth men. She did not
know, but it seemed to her that where every one hinted at the same
thing, there must be some truth in their hints.

All of which proves, I think, that Mary Hope's point of view was the
only one that she could logically hold, living as she did in the camp
of the enemy; having, as she had, a delicate sense of propriety, and
wanting above all things to do nothing crude and common. As she saw
it, she simply could _not_ ask any of the Lorrigans to her picnic and
dance on the Fourth of July.




CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

THE LORRIGAN VIEWPOINT


I have said that much depends upon one's point of view. Mary Hope's
viewpoint was not shared by the Devil's Tooth. They had one of their
own, and to them it seemed perfectly logical, absolutely justifiable.

They heard all about the Fourth of July picnic and dance, to be held
at Cottonwood Spring and in the schoolhouse of their own building.
Immediately they remembered that Cottonwood Spring was on Lorrigan
land, that Lorrigan money had paid for the material that went into the
schoolhouse, that Lorrigan labor had built it, Lorrigan generosity had
given it over to the public as represented by Mary Hope Douglas and
the children who came to her to be taught. In their minds loomed the
fact that Lorrigan money had bought books for the school, and that Tom
Lorrigan himself had paid close to four hundred dollars for the
piano.

They heard that invitations were being sent broadcast, that a crowd
was coming from Pocatello, from Lava, from Jumpoff--invited to come
and spend a day and night in merry-making. Yet no invitation came to
the Devil's Tooth ranch, not a word was said to them by Mary Hope, not
a hint that they were expected, or would be welcome.

Belle met Mary Hope in the trail one day, just a week before the
Fourth. Mary Hope was riding home from school; Belle was driving out
from Jumpoff. It is the custom of the outland places for acquaintances
to stop for a bit of friendly conversation when they meet, since
meetings are so far between. But, though Belle slowed the pintos to a
walk, Mary Hope only nodded, said, "How do you do," and rode on.

"She looked guilty," Belle reported wrathfully to Tom and the boys at
the supper table. "Guilty as sin. She seemed to be afraid I was going
to ask her if I couldn't come to her dance. The little fool! Does she
think for a minute I'd _go?_ She hasn't so much as thanked you for
that piano, Tom. She hasn't said one word."

"Well, I didn't put my name and _ad_-dress on it," Tom palliated the
ingratitude while he buttered a hot biscuit generously. "And there
wasn't any name on the books to show who bought 'em. Maybe she
thinks--"

"I don't care what she thinks! It's the way she acts that counts.
Everybody in Jumpoff has got invitations to her picnic and dance. They
say it's to pay us for the piano--and they think she's doing some
wonderful stunt. And we're left out in the cold!"

"We never was in where it was right warm, since I can remember," said
Al. "Except when we made it warm ourselves."

"Sam Pretty Cow was saying yesterday--" and Duke repeated a bit of
gossip that had a gibe at the Lorrigans for its point. "He got it over
to Hitchcocks. It come from the Douglases. I guess Mary Hope don't
want nothing of us--except what she can get out of us. We been a good
thing, all right--easy marks."

Duke had done the least for her and therefore felt qualified to say
the most. His last sentence did its work. Tom pulled his eyebrows
together, drew his lip between his teeth and leaned back in his chair,
thinking deeply, his eyes glittering between his half-closed lids.

"Easy marks, ay?" he snorted. "The Lorrigans have been called plenty
of things, fur back as I can remember, but by the humpin' hyenas, they
never was called easy marks before!"

That was Tom's last comment on the subject. Belle, not liking the look
on his face, because she knew quite well what it portended, passed him
two kinds of preserves and changed the subject. Al and Duke presently
left for the bunk house. Mary Hope's party and her evident intention
to slight the Lorrigans was not mentioned again for days.

But Tom's wrath was smoldering. He was not hasty. He waited. He
himself met Mary Hope in the trail one day, lifted his hat to her
without a word and rode on. Mary Hope let him go with a chilly nod and
a murmured greeting which was no more than an empty form. Certainly
she did not read Tom's mind, did not dream that he was thinking of the
piano,--and from an angle that had never once presented itself to
her.

So, now that you see how both were justified in their opinions, as
formed from different points of view, let me tell you what happened.

Mary Hope had her picnic, with never a thunderstorm to mar the day.
Which is unusual, since a picnic nearly always gets itself rained
upon. She had sent out more than a hundred invitations--tickets two
dollars, please--and there were more who invited themselves and had to
be supplied with tickets cut hastily out of pasteboard boxes that had
held sandwiches.

Mary Hope was jubilant. Mother Douglas, as official hostess, moved
here and there among the women who fussed over the baskets and
placated with broken pieces of cake their persistent offspring. Mother
Douglas actually smiled, though her face plainly showed that it was
quite unaccustomed to the expression, and tilted the smile downward at
the corners. Mother Douglas was a good woman, but she had had little
in her life to bring smiles, and her habitual expression was one of
mournful endurance.

It was sultry, and toward evening the mosquitoes swarmed out of the
lush grass around the spring and set the horses stamping and moving
about uneasily. But it was a very successful picnic, with all the
chatter, all the gourmandizing, all the gossip, all the childish
romping in starched white frocks, all the innocuous pastimes that one
expects to find at picnics.

Mary Hope wondered how in the world they were all going to find room
inside the schoolhouse to dance. She had been frugal in the matter of
music, dreading to spend any money in hiring professional musicians,
lest she might not have enough people to justify the expense. Now she
wished nervously that she had done as Lance Lorrigan had done, and
brought musicians from Lava. Of course, there had been no piano when
Lance gave his party, which was different. She herself meant to play,
and Art Miller had brought his fiddle, and Jennie had volunteered to
"chord" with him. But, Mary Hope felt much nervous apprehension lest
these Pocatello and Lava people should think it was just Scotch
stinginess on her part.

Late in the afternoon a few of the ranchers rode hastily homeward to
"do the chores," but the Lava and Pocatello crowd remained, and began
to drift up to the schoolhouse and drum on the piano that was actually
going to pay for itself and free Mary Hope's pride from its burden.

By sundown a dozen energetic couples were waltzing while a
Pocatello dentist with a stiff, sandy pompadour chewed gum and played
loudly, with much arm movement and very little rhythm; so very
little rhythm that the shuffling feet frequently ceased shuffling,
and expostulations rose high above his thunderous chords.

By dusk the overworked ranch women had fed the last hungry mouth and
put away the fragments of home-baked cakes and thick sandwiches, and
were forming a solid line of light shirtwaists and dark skirts along
the wall. The dance was really beginning.

As before, groups of men stood around outside and smoked and slapped
at mosquitoes--except that at Lance's party there had been no
mosquitoes to slap--and talked in undertones the gossip of the ranges.
If now and then the name of Lorrigan was mentioned, there was no
Lorrigan present to hear. At intervals the "floor manager" would come
to the door and call out numbers: "Number one, and up to and including
sixteen, git your pardners fer a two-step!" Whereupon certain men
would pinch out the glow of their cigarettes and grind the stubs into
the sod under their heels, and go in to find partners. With that
crowd, not all could dance at once; Mary Hope remembered pridefully
that there had been no dancing by numbers at the party Lance Lorrigan
gave.

What a terrible dance that had been! A regular rowdy affair. And this
crowd, big as it was, had as yet shown no disposition to rowdyism. It
surely did make a difference, thought Mary Hope, what kind of people
sponsored an entertainment. With the Devil's Tooth outfit as the
leaders, who could expect anything but trouble?

Then she caught herself thinking, with a vague heaviness in her heart,
how Lance had taken her away from that other dance; of that long,
wonderful, silent ride through the starlight; how careful he had been
of her--how tender! But it was only the way he had with him, she later
reminded herself impatiently, and smiled over her shoulder at the
whirling couples who danced to the music she made; and thought of the
money that made her purse heavy as lead, the money that would wipe out
her debt to the Lorrigans,--to Lance, if it really were Lance who had
bought the piano.

A faint sound came to her through the open window, the rattle of a
wagon coming down the hill in the dark. More people were coming to the
dance, which meant more money to give to the Lorrigans. Mary Hope
smiled again and played faster; so fast that more than one young man
shook his head at her as he circled past, and puffed ostentatiously,
laughing at the pace she set. She had a wild vision of other dances
which she would give--Labor Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas, New
Year's--and pay the Lorrigans for everything they had done; for the
books, for the schoolhouse, everything. She felt that then, and then
only, could she face Lance Lorrigan level-eyed, cool, calm, feeling
herself a match for him.

The rattle of the wagon sounded nearer, circled the yard, came in at
the gate. Mary Hope was giving the dancers the fastest two-step she
could play, and she laughed aloud. More people were coming to the
dance, and there might not be coffee and sandwiches enough at
midnight,--she had over three hundred dollars already.

The dancers whirled past, parted to right and left, stopped all at
once. Mary Hope, still playing, looked over her shoulder--into the
dark, impenetrable gaze of Tom Lorrigan, standing there in his working
clothes, with his big, black Stetson on his head and his six-shooter
in its holster on his hip. Behind him Mary Hope saw Al and Duke and
Belle, and behind them other Devil's Tooth men, cowboys whom she only
knew slightly from meeting them sometimes in the trail as she rode to
and from school. The cowboys seemed to be facing the other way,
holding back the crowd near the door.

Mary Hope looked again into Tom's face, looked at Belle. Her fingers
strayed uncertainly over the keys, making discords. She half rose,
then sat down again. The room, all at once, seemed very still.

"I'm sorry to disturb yuh," Tom said, touching his hat brim and
lifting his eyebrows at her, half smiling with his lips pulled to one
side, like Lance--oh, maddeningly like Lance!--"but I've come after
the piano."

Mary Hope gasped. Her arms went out instinctively across the keyboard,
as if she would protect the instrument from his defaming touch.

"I'll have to ask yuh to move," said Tom. "Sorry to disturb yuh."

"I--I'm going to pay for it," said Mary Hope, finding her voice faint
and husky. She had an odd sensation that this was a nightmare. She had
dreamed so often of the dance and of the Lorrigans.

"I paid for it long ago. I bought the piano--I've come after it."

Mary Hope slid off the stool, stood facing him, her eyes very blue.
After all, he was not Lance. "You can't have it!" she said. "I won't
let you take it. I'm raising money to pay you for it, and I intend to
keep it." She reached for her purse, but Tom restrained her with a
gesture.

"It ain't for sale," he said, with that hateful smile that always made
her wonder just what lay behind it. "I own it, and I ain't thinking of
selling. Here's the shipping bill and the guarantee and all; I brought
'em along to show you, in case you got curious about whose piano it
is. You see the number on the bill--86945. You'll find it tallies with
the number in the case, if you want to look. Pete, Ed, John, take it
and load it in the wagon."

"Well, now, see here! This is an outrage! How much is the darn thing
worth, anyway? This crowd is not going to stand by and see a raw deal
like this pulled off." It was the Pocatello dentist, and he was very
much excited.

"You saw a raw deal, and stood for it, when you saw the Lorrigans
cold-shouldered out of the dance," Belle flashed at him. "We've stood
for a lot, but this went a little beyond our limit."

"We're not going to stand for anything like this, you know!" Another
man--also from Lava--shouldered his way up to them.

"Git outa the way, or you'll git tromped on!" cried Pete over his
shoulder as he backed, embracing the piano and groping for handholds.

The Lava man gripped Pete, trying to pull him away. Pete kicked back
viciously with a spurred heel. The Lava man yelled and retreated,
limping.

Just how it happened, no two men or women afterward agreed in the
telling. But somehow the merrymakers, who were merry no longer, went
back and back until they were packed solidly at the sides and near
the door, a few squeezing through it when they were lucky enough to
find room. Behind them came four of the Devil's Tooth men with
six-shooters, looking the crowd coldly in the eyes. Behind these came
the piano, propelled by those whom Tom had named with the tone of
authority.

The crowd squeezed closer against the wall as the piano went past
them. There was not so much noise and confusion as one would expect.
Then, at the last, slim, overworked, round-shouldered Mother Douglas,
who had done little save pray and weep and work and scold all her
life, walked up and slapped Belle full on the cheek.

"Ye painted Jezebel!" she cried, her eyes burning. "Long have I wanted
to smack ye for your wickedness and the brazen ways of ye--ye painted
Jezebel!"

Blind, dazed with anger, Belle struck back.

"Don't you touch my mother! Shame on you! Shame on you all! I didna
ask you for your favors, for any gifts--and you gave them and then you
come and take them--" This was the voice of Mary Hope, shrill with
rage.

"You gave a dance in a house built for you by the Lorrigans, on
Lorrigan land, and you danced to the music of a Lorrigan piano--and
the Lorrigans were not good enough to be asked to come! Get outa my
way, Hope Douglas--and take your mother with you. Call _me_ a painted
Jezebel, will she?"

The piano was outside, being loaded into the wagon, where Riley sat on
the seat, chewing tobacco grimly and expectorating copiously, without
regard for those who came close. Outside there was also much clamor of
voices. A lantern held high by a Devil's Tooth man who had a gun in
the other, lighted the platform and the wagon beside it.

At the last, Tom Lorrigan himself went back after the stool, and the
room silenced so that his footsteps sounded loud on the empty floor.
He looked at Mary Hope, looked at her mother, looked at the huddled,
whispering women, the gaping children. He swung out of his course and
slipped one arm around Belle and so led her outside, the stool
swinging by one leg in the other hand.

"A painted Jezebel!" Belle said under her breath when they were
outside the ring of light. "My God, Tom, think of that!"

Mary Hope had never in her life suffered such humiliation. It seemed
to her that she stood disgraced before the whole world, that there was
no spot wherein she might hide her shame. Her mother was weeping
hysterically because she had been "slappit by the painted Jezebel" and
because Aleck was not there to avenge her. The Pocatello and Lava
crowd seemed on the point of leaving, and were talking very fast in
undertones that made Mary Hope feel that they were talking about her.
The rattle of the Lorrigan wagon hauling the piano away, the click of
the horses' feet as the Devil's Tooth riders convoyed the instrument,
made her wince, and want to put her palms over her ears to shut out
the sound of it.

But she was Scotch, and a Douglas. There was no weak fiber that would
let her slump before this emergency. She went back to the little
platform, stood beside the desk that held the globe and the
dictionary and a can of flowers, and rapped loudly with the ruler from
the Pocatello hardware store. By degrees the room ceased buzzing with
excited talk, the shuffling feet stood still.

"I am very sorry," said Mary Hope clearly, "that your pleasure
has--has been interrupted. It seems there has been a misunderstanding
about the piano. I thought that I could buy it for the school, and for
that reason I gave this dance. But it seems--that--I'm terribly sorry
the dance has been spoiled for you, and if the gentlemen who bought
tickets will please step this way, I will return your money."

She had to clench her teeth to keep her lips from trembling. Her hands
shook so that she could scarcely open her handbag. But her purpose
never faltered, her eyes were blue and sparkling when she looked out
over the crowd. She waited. Feet scuffled the bare floor, voices
whispered, but no man came toward her.

"I want to return your money," she said sharply, "because without the
piano I suppose you will not want to dance, and--"

"Aw, the dickens!" cried a big, good-natured cowpuncher with a
sun-peeled nose and twinkly gray eyes. "I guess we all have danced
plenty without no piano music. There's mouth harps in this crowd, and
there's a fiddle. Git yore pardners for a square dance!" And under his
breath, to his immediate masculine neighbors he added: "To hell with
the Lorrigans and their piano!"

Mary Hope could have hugged that cowpuncher who hastily seized her
hand and swung her into place as the first couple in the first set.

When the three sets were formed he called the dance figures in a
sonorous tone that swept out through the open windows and reached the
ears of the Lorrigans as they rode away.

          "_Honor_ yore pardner--and the lady on your _left!_
            _Join_ eight hands, an' a-circle to the _left!_
      Break an _Indian_ trail home in the Indian _style_, with the
                              lady in the _lead!_
             Swing the lady _behind_ you once in a while!--
                The lady _behind_ you once in a while!--
                _Now_ your pardner, and go hog _wild!_"

The fiddle and two mouth harps were scarcely heard above the rhythmic
stamping of feet, the loud chant of the caller, who swung Mary Hope
clear of the floor whenever he put his arm around her.

             "A--_second_ couple out, and a-cir-cle _four!_
                           _Lay_-dees do ce _do!_
                 _You_ swing me, an' I'll swing _you_--
             And _we'll_ all dance in the same ole _shoe!_

        "_Same_ four on to the _next!_--dance the ocean _wave!_
               The _same_ ole boys, the _same_ ole trail,
                  _Watch_ that possum walk the _rail!_
                    _Cir_-cle six, and a-do ce _do!_
          Swing, _every_ one swing, and a--promenade _home!_"

"_Who_ wants a piano? Couldn't hear it if yuh' had it!" he cried,
while the twelve couples paused breathless. Then he wiped his face
frankly and thoroughly with his handkerchief, caught Mary Hope's hand
in his, lifted his voice again in his contagious sing-song:

                "_Cir_-cle eight, till you get straight!
            _Swing_ them ladies, like swingin' on a _gate!_
               _Left_ foot up, and-a-right foot _down_--
                 _Make_ that big foot jar the _ground!_
                               Prom-e-_nade!_
             _Swing_ yore corner, if you ain't too _slow!_
                _Now_ yore pardner, and around you _go!_
               For the--_last_ time--and a-_long_ time--
                _You_ know where, and a-I don't _care!_"

The dance was saved by the big cowpuncher with the peeling nose and
the twinkly gray eyes. Mary Hope had never seen him before that day,
but whenever she looked at him a lump came in her throat, a warm rush
of sheer gratitude thrilled her. She did not learn his name--two or
three men called him Burt, but he seemed to be a stranger in the
country. Burt saved her dance and kept things moving until the sky
was streaked with red and birds were twittering outside in the
cottonwoods.

She wanted to thank him, to tell him a little of her gratitude. But
when she went to look for him afterwards he was gone, and no one
seemed to know just where he belonged. Which was strange, when you
consider that in the Black Rim country every one knows everybody.




CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

PEDDLED RUMORS


In the smoking compartment of a Pullman car that rocked westward from
Pocatello two days after the Fourth, Lance sprawled his big body on a
long seat, his head joggling against the dusty window, his mind
sleepily recalling, round by round, a certain prize fight that had
held him in Reno over the Fourth and had cost him some money and much
disgust. The clicking of the car trucks directly underneath, the
whirring of the electric fan over his head, the reek of tobacco smoke
seemed to him to last for hours, seemed likely to go on forever. Above
it all, rising stridently now and then in a disagreeable monotone, the
harsh, faintly snarling voice of a man on the opposite seat blended
unpleasantly with his dozing discomfort. For a long time the man had
been talking, and Lance had been aware of a grating quality of the
voice, that yet seemed humorous in its utterances, since his two
listeners laughed frequently and made brief, profane comment that
encouraged the talker to go on. Finally, as he slowly returned from
the hazy borderland of slumber, Lance became indifferently aware of
the man's words.

From under the peak of his plaid traveling cap Lance lifted his
eyelids the length of his black lashes, measured the men with a
half-minute survey and closed his eyes again. The face matched the
voice. A harsh face, with bold blue eyes, black eyebrows that met over
his nose, a mouth slightly prominent, hard and tilted downward at the
corners. Over the harshness like a veil was spread a sardonic kind of
humor that gave attraction to the man's personality. In the monotone
of his voice was threaded a certain dry wit that gave point to his
observations. He was an automobile salesman, it appeared, and his
headquarters were in Ogden, and he was going through to Shoshone on
business connected with a delayed shipment of cars. But he was
talking, when Lance first awoke to his monologue, of the sagebrush
country through which the fast mail was reeling drunkenly, making up
time that had been lost because of a washout that had held the train
for an hour while two section crews sweated over a broken culvert.

"--And by gosh! the funniest thing I ever saw happened right up here
in a stretch of country they call the Black Rim. If I was a story
writer, I sure would write it up. Talk about the West being
tame!--why, I can take you right now, within a few hours' ride, to
where men ride with guns on 'em just as much as they wear their pants.
Only reason they ain't all killed off, I reckon, is because they
_all_ pack guns.

"Hard-boiled? Say, there's a bunch up there that's never been curried
below the knees--and never will be. They pulled off a stunt the Fourth
that I'll bet ain't ever been duplicated anywhere on earth, and never
will be. I was in Pocatello, and I went on up with the crowd from
there, and got in on the show. And sa-ay, it was some show!

"They've got a feud up there that's rock-bottomed as any feud you ever
heard of in Kentucky. It's been going on for years, and it'll keep
going on till the old folks all die off or move away--or land in the
pen. Hasn't been a killing in there for years, but that's because
they're all so damn tough they know if one starts shooting it'll
spread like a prairie fire through dry grass.

"There's an outfit in there--the Devil's Tooth outfit. Far back as the
country was settled--well, they say the first Lorrigan went up in
there to get away from the draft in the Civil War, and headed a gang
of outlaws that shot and hung more white men and Injuns than any
outfit in the State--and that's going some.

"They were killers from the first draw. Other settlers went in, and
had to knuckle under. The Devil's Tooth gang had the Black Rim in its
fist. Father to son--they handed down the disposition--I could tell
yuh from here to Boise yarns about that outfit.

"Now, of course, things have tamed down. As I say, there hasn't been a
Devil's Tooth killing for years. But it's there, you know--it's in the
blood. It's all under the surface. They're a good-hearted bunch, but
it'll take about four generations to live down the reputation they've
got, if they all turned Methodist preachers. And," the grating voice
paused for a minute, so that one caught the full significance of his
hint, "if all yuh hear is true, religion ain't struck the Devil's
Tooth yet. It ain't my business to peddle rumors, and the time's past
when you can hang a man on suspicion--but if you read about the
Devil's Tooth outfit some time in the paper, remember I said it's
brewing. The present Tom Lorrigan ain't spending _all_ his time
driving his cows to water. He was hauled up a few years ago, on a
charge of rustling. An old Scotchman had him arrested. Tom was
cleared--he had the best lawyer in the West--brought him from Boise,
where they need good lawyers!--and got off clear. And since then he's
been laying low. That's the one mistake he's made, in my opinion. He
never did a damn thing, never tried to kill the Scotchman, never acted
up at all. And when you think of the breed of cats he is you'll see
yourself that the Black Rim is setting on a volcano.

"Tom Lorrigan has got more men working for him than any outfit in that
country. He runs his own round-up and won't have a rep--that's a
representative--from any other outfit in his camp. His own men haze
outside stock off his range. He's getting rich. He ships more cattle,
more horses than anybody in the country. He don't have any truck with
any of his neighbors, and his men don't. They're outside men, mostly.
There ain't a thing anybody can swear to--there ain't a thing said out
loud about the Devil's Tooth. But it's hinted and it's whispered.

"So all this preamble prepares you for the funniest thing I ever saw
pulled. But I guess I'm about the only one who saw how funny it was. I
know the Black Rim don't seem to see the joke, and I know the Devil's
Tooth don't.

"You see, it's so big and neighbors are so far apart that there ain't
any school district, and a few kids were getting school age, and no
place to send 'em. So a couple of families got together and hired the
daughter of this old Scotchman to teach school. I ain't calling her by
name--she's a nice kid, and a nervy kid, and I can see where she
thought she was doing the right thing.

"Well, she taught in a tumble-down little shack for a while, and one
day this Tom Lorrigan come along, and saw how the girl and the kids
were sitting there half froze, and he hazed 'em all home. Broke up the
school. Being a Lorrigan, all he'd have to do would be to tell 'em to
git--but it made a little stir, all right. The schoolma'am, she went
right back the next morning and started in again. Like shooing a
setting hen off her nest, it was.

"Well, next thing they knew, the Devil's Tooth had built a schoolhouse
and said nothing about it. Tom's a big-hearted cuss--I know
Tom--tried to sell him a car, last fall. Darn near made it stick, too.
I figured that Tom Lorrigan was maybe ashamed of busting up the
school and making talk, so he put up a regular schoolhouse. Then one
of his boys had been away to college--only one of the outfit that
ever went beyond the Rim, as far as I know--and he gave a dance; a
regular house-warming.

"Well, I wasn't at that dance. I wish I had been. They packed in
whisky by the barrel. Everybody got drunk, and everybody got to
fighting. This young rooster from college licked a dozen or so, and
then took the schoolma'am and drove clear to Jumpoff with her, and
licked everybody in town before he left. Sa-ay, it musta been some
dance, all right!

"Then--here comes the funny part. Everybody was all stirred up over
the Lorrigans' dance, and right in the middle of the powwow, blest if
the Lorrigans didn't buy a brand new piano and haul it to the
schoolhouse. They say it was the college youth, that was stuck on the
schoolma'am. Well, everybody out that way got to talking and
gossiping--you know how it goes--until the schoolma'am, just to settle
the talk, goes and gives a dance to raise money to pay for the piano.
She's all right--I don't think for a minute she's anything but
_right_--and it might have been old Tom himself that bought the piano.
Anyway, she went and sent invitations all around, two dollars per
invite, and got a big crowd. Had a picnic in the grove, and everything
was lovely.

"But sa-ay! She forgot to invite the Lorrigans! Everybody in the
country there, except the Devil's Tooth outfit. I figure that she was
afraid they might rough things up a little--and maybe she didn't like
to ask them to pay for something they'd already paid for--but anyway,
just when the dance was going good, here came the whole Devil's Tooth
outfit with a four-horse team, and I'm darned if they didn't walk
right in there, in the middle of a dance, take the piano stool right
out from under the schoolma'am, and haul the piano home! They--"

A loud guffaw from his friends halted the narrative there. Before the
teller of the tale went on, Lance pulled his cap down over his eyes,
got up and walked out and stood on the platform.

"They hauled the piano _home!_" He scowled out at the reeling line of
telegraph posts. "They--hauled--that piano--home!"

He lighted a cigar, took two puffs and threw the thing out over the
rail. "She didn't ask the Lorrigans--to her party. And dad--"

He whirled and went back into the smoking compartment. He wanted to
hear more. The seat he had occupied was still empty and he settled
into it, his cap pulled over his eyes, a magazine before his face. The
others paid no attention. The harsh-voiced man was still talking.

"Well, they can't go on forever. They're bound to slip up, soon or
late. And now, of course, there's a line-up against them. It's in the
blood and I don't reckon they can change--but the country's changing.
I know of one man that's in there now, working in the dark, trying to
get the goods--but of course, it's not my business to peddle that kind
of stuff. I was tickled about the piano, though. The schoolma'am was
game. She offered to give us back our two dollars per, but of course
nobody was piker enough to take her up on it. We went ahead and had
the dance with harmonicas and a fiddle, and made out all right. Looks
to me like the schoolma'am's all to the good. She's got the dance
money--"

It was of no use. Lance found he could not listen to that man talking
about Mary Hope. To strike the man on his fish-like, hard-lipped mouth
would only make matters worse, so he once more left the compartment
and stood in the open doorway of the vestibule just beyond. The train,
slowing to a stop at a tank station, jarred to a standstill. In the
compartment behind him the man's voice sounded loud and raucous now
that the mechanical noises had ceased.

"Well, I never knew it to fail--what's in the blood will come out.
They've lived there for three generations now. They're killers,
thieves at heart--human birds of prey, and it don't matter if it is
all under the surface. I say it's _there_."

At that moment, Lance had the hunger to kill, to stop forever the
harsh voice that talked on and on of the Lorrigans and their ingrained
badness. He stepped outside, slamming the door shut behind him. The
voice, fainter now, could still be heard. He swung down to the
cinders, stood there staring ahead at the long train, counting the
cars, watching the fireman run with his oil can and climb into the
engine cab. He could no longer hear the voice, but he felt that he
must forget it or go back and kill the man who owned it.

In the car ahead a little girl leaned out of the window, her curls
whipping across her face. Jubilantly she waved her hand at him,
shrilled a sweet, "Hello-oh. Where _you_ goin'? I'm goin' to my
grandma's house!"

The rigor left Lance's jaw. He smiled, showing his teeth, saw that a
brakeman was down inspecting a hot box on the forward truck of that
car, and walked along to the window where the little girl leaned and
waited, waving two sticky hands at him to hurry.

"Hello, baby. I know a grandma that's going to be mighty happy, before
long," he said, standing just under the window and looking up at her.

"D'you know my gran'ma? S'e lives in a green house an' s'e's got
five--hundred baby kittens for me to see! An' I'm goin' to bring one
home wis me--but I _do'no_ which one. D'you like yellow kittens, or
litty gray kittens, or black ones?"

Gravely Lance studied the matter, his eyebrows pulled together, his
mouth wearing the expression which had disturbed Mary Hope when he
came to mend the lock on her door.

"I'd take--now, if your grandma has one that's all spotted, you might
take that, couldn't you? Then some days you'd love the yellow spots,
and some days you'd love the black spots, and some days--"

"Ooh! And I could call it _all_ the nice names I want to call it!" The
little girl pressed her hands together rapturously. "When my kitty's
got its yellow-spotty day, I'll call him Goldy, and when--"

The engine bell clanged warning, the wheels began slowly to turn.

"Ooh! You'll get left and have to walk!" cried the little girl, in
big-eyed alarm.

"All right, baby--you take the spotted one!" Lance called over his
shoulder as he ran. He was smiling when he swung up the steps. No
longer did he feel that he must kill the harsh-voiced man.

He went forward to his own section, sat down and stared out of the
window. As the memory of the little girl faded he drifted into
gloomily reviewing the things he had heard said of his family. Were
they really pariahs among their kind? Outlawed because of the blood
that flowed in their veins?

Away in the back of his mind, pushed there because the thought was not
pleasant, and because thinking could not make it pleasant, had been
the knowledge that he was returning to a life with which he no longer
seemed to be quite in tune. Two weeks had served to show him that he
had somehow drifted away from his father and Duke and Al, that he had
somehow come to look at life differently. He did not believe in the
harsh man's theory of their outlawry; yet he felt a reluctance toward
meeting again their silent measurement of himself, their intangible
aloofness.

The harsh-voiced man had dragged it all to the surface, roughly
sketching for the delectation of his friends the very things which
Lance had been deliberately covering from his own eyes. He had done
more. He had told things that made Lance wince. To humiliate Mary Hope
before the whole Black Rim, as they had done, to take away the piano
which he had wanted her to have--for that Lance could have throttled
his dad. It was like Tom to do it. Lance could not doubt that he had
done it. He could picture the whole wretchedly cheap retaliation for
the slight which Mary Hope had given them, and the picture tormented
him, made him writhe mentally. But he could picture also Mary Hope's
prim disapproval of them all, her deliberate omission of the Lorrigans
from her list of invited guests, and toward that picture he felt a
keen resentment.

The whole thing maddened him. The more, because he was in a sense
responsible for it all. Just because he had not wanted that lonely
look to cloud the blue eyes of her, just because he had not wanted her
to be unhappy in her isolation, he had somehow brought to the surface
all those boorish qualities which he had begun to hate in his family.

"Cheap--cheap as dirt!" he gritted once, and he included them all in
the denunciation.

Furiously he wished that he had gone straight home, had not stopped in
Reno for the fight. But on the heels of that he knew that he would
have made the trouble worse, had he been at the Devil's Tooth on the
day of the Fourth. He would have quarreled with Tom, but there was
scant hope that he could have prevented the piano-moving. Tom
Lorrigan, as Lance had plenty of memories to testify, was not the man
whom one could prevent from doing what he set out to do.

At a little junction Lance changed to the branch line, still dwelling
fiercely upon his heritage, upon the lawless environment in which that
heritage of violence had flourished. He was in the mood to live up to
the Lorrigan reputation when he swung off the train at Jumpoff, but no
man crossed his trail.

So Lance carried with him the full measure of his rage against Mary
Hope and the Devil's Tooth, when he rode out of Jumpoff on a
lean-flanked black horse that rolled a wicked eye back at the rider
and carried his head high, looking for trouble along the trail.




CHAPTER NINETEEN

MARY HOPE HAS MUCH TROUBLE

Mary Hope, still taking her own point of view, had troubles in plenty
to bear. In her own way she was quite as furious as was Lance, felt
quite as injured as did the Devil's Tooth outfit, had all the
humiliation of knowing that the Black Rim talked of nothing but her
quarrel with the Lorrigans, and in addition had certain domestic
worries of her own.

Her mother harped continually on the piano quarrel and the indignity
of having been "slappit" by the painted Jezebel. But that was not what
worried Mary Hope most, for she was long accustomed to her mother's
habit of dwelling tearfully on some particular wrong that had been
done her. Mary Hope was worried over her father.

On the day of the Fourth he had stayed at home, tinkering up his
machinery, making ready for haying that was soon to occupy all his
waking hours,--and they would be as many as daylight would give him.
He had been doing something to an old mower that should have gone to
the junk heap long ago, and with the rusty sickle he had managed to
cut his hand very deeply, just under the ball of the thumb. He had not
taken the trouble to cleanse the cut thoroughly, but had wrapped his
handkerchief around the hand and gone glumly on with his work. Now, on
the third day, Mary Hope had become frightened at the discoloration of
the wound and the way in which his arm was swelling, and had begged
him to let her drive him to Jumpoff where he could take the train to
Lava and a doctor. As might be expected, he had refused to do anything
of the kind. He would not spend the time, and he would not spend the
money, and he thought that a poultice would draw out the swelling well
enough. Mary Hope had no faith in poultices, and she was on the point
of riding to Jumpoff and telegraphing for a doctor when her father
cannily read her mind and forbade her so sternly that she quailed
before him.

There was another thing, which she must do. She must take the money
she had gotten from the dance and with it pay Tom Lorrigan for the
schoolhouse, or stop the school altogether. Jim Boyle, when she had
ridden over to the AJ to tell him, had said that she could do as she
pleased about paying for the schoolhouse; but if she refused to teach
his kids, he would get some one else who would. Jim Boyle seemed to
feel no compunctions whatever about accepting favors from the Devil's
Tooth. As to Sederson, the Swede, he was working for Boyle, and did
what his boss said. So the matter was flung back upon Mary Hope for
adjustment according to the dictates of her pride or conscience, call
it which you will.

Her mother advised her to keep the money and buy another piano. But
Mary Hope declared that she would not use the schoolhouse while it was
a Lorrigan gift; whereupon Mother Douglas yielded the point grudgingly
and told her to send Hugh, the gawky youth, to the Devil's Tooth with
the three hundred dollars and a note saying what the money was for.
But her father would not permit Hugh to go, reiterating feverishly
that he needed Hugh on the ranch. And with the pain racking him and
making his temper something fearful to face, Mary Hope dared not argue
with him.

So she herself set out with her money and her hurt pride and
all her troubles, to pay the Devil's Tooth outfit for the
schoolhouse--approximately, since she had only a vague idea of
the cost of the building--and then be quit of the Lorrigan
patronage forever.

It happened that she found Tom at home and evidently in a temper not
much milder than her father's. Two of the Devil's Tooth men were at
the stable door when she rode up, and to them Tom was talking in a
voice that sent shivers over Mary Hope when she heard it. Not loud and
declamatory, like her father's, but with a certain implacable calm
that was harder to face than stormy vituperation.

But she faced it, now that she was there and Tom had been warned of
her coming by Coaley, who pointed his ears forward inquiringly when
she neared the stable. The two cowpunchers gave Tom slanting glances
and left, muttering under their breaths to each other as they led
their sweaty horses into a farther corral.

Tom lifted his hand to his hat brim in mute recognition of her
presence, gave her a swift inquiring look and turned Coaley into the
stable with the saddle on. Mary Hope took one deep breath and,
fumbling at a heavy little bag tied beside the fork of her saddle,
plunged straight into her subject.

"I've brought the money I raised at the dance, Mr. Lorrigan," she
said. "Since you refused to take it for the piano, I have brought it
to pay you for the schoolhouse--with Mr. Boyle's approval. I have
three hundred and twelve dollars. If that is not enough, I will pay
you the balance later." She felt secretly rather well satisfied with
the speech, which went even better than her rehearsals of it on the
way over.

Then, having untied the bag, she looked up, and her satisfaction
slumped abruptly into perturbation. Tom was leaning back against the
corral rails, with his arms folded--and just _why_ must he lift his
eyebrows and smile like Lance? She was going to hand him the bag, but
her fingers bungled and she dropped it in the six-inch dust of the
trail.

Tom unfolded his arms, moved forward a pace, picked up the bag and
offered it to her. "You've got the buying fever, looks like to me," he
observed coldly. "I haven't got any schoolhouse to sell."

"But you have! You built it, and--"

"I did build a shack up on the hill, awhile back," Tom admitted in the
same deliberate tone, "but I turned it over to Jim Boyle and the Swede
and whoever else wanted to send their kids there to school." Since
Mary Hope refused to put out her hand for the bag, Tom began very
calmly to retie it on her saddle. But she struck his hand away.

"I shall not take the money. I shall pay for the schoolhouse, Mr.
Lorrigan. Unless I can pay for it I shall never teach school there
another day!" Her voice shook with nervous tension. One did not
lightly and unthinkingly measure wills with Tom Lorrigan.

"That's your business, whether you teach school or not," said Tom,
holding the bag as though he still meant to tie it on the saddle.

"But if I don't they will hire another teacher, and that will drive me
away from home to earn money--" Mary Hope had not in the least
intended to say that, which might be interpreted as a bid for
sympathy.

"Well, Belle, she says no strange woman can use that schoolhouse.
They might not find anything to teach school in, if they tried that."

"You've got to keep that money." Mary Hope turned the Roman-nosed
horse half away, meaning to leave Tom there with the money in his
hand.

Tom reached calmly out and caught the horse by the bridle.

"I want to tell you something," he drawled, in the voice which she had
heard when she came up. "I haven't _'got'_ to do anything. But I tell
you what I _will_ do. If you don't take this money back and go ahead
with your school-teaching as if nothing had happened, I'll burn that
schoolhouse to the last chip in the yard. And this money I'll take and
throw down that crevice under the Tooth, up there. The money won't do
nobody any good, and the schoolhouse won't be nothing at all but a
black spot. You can suit yourself--it's up to you."

Mary Hope looked at him, opened her lips to defy him, and instead gave
a small sob. Her Scotch blood chilled at the threat of such wanton
destruction of property and money, but it was not that which made her
afraid at that moment of Tom Lorrigan,--held her silent, glaring
impotently.

She trembled while he tied the money to the saddle fork again, using a
knot she had never seen tied before. She wanted to tell him how much
she hated him, how much she hated the whole Lorrigan family, how she
would die before she ever entered the door of that schoolhouse again
unless it was paid for and she could be free of obligation to him.

But when his head was bent, hiding all of his face but the chin, she
had a wild fleeting notion that he was Lance, and that he would lift
his head and smile at her. Yet when he lifted his head he was just Tom
Lorrigan, with a hardness in his face which Lance did not have, and a
glint in his eye that told her his will was inexorable, that he would
do exactly what he said he would do, and perhaps more, if she opposed
him.

Without a word she turned back, crushed under the sense of defeat.
Useless destruction of property and money did not seem to mean
anything at all to a Lorrigan, but to her the thought was horrible.
She could not endure the thought of what he would do if she refused to
use the schoolhouse. Much less could she endure the thought of
entering the place again while it remained a Lorrigan gift.

Blindly fighting an hysterical impulse to cry aloud like a child over
her hurt, she reined Jamie into the shortcut trail of the Slide.
Coming down she had followed the wagon road, partly because the longer
trail postponed a dreaded meeting, and partly because Jamie, being
uncertain in his temper and inclined to panicky spells when things did
not go just right with him, could not safely be trusted on the Slide
trail, which was strange to him.

Until she reached the narrow place along the shale side hill she did
not realize what trail she was taking. Then, because she could not
leave the trail and take the road without retracing her steps almost
to the stable, she went on, giving Jamie an impatient kick with her
heel and sending him snorting over the treacherous stuff in a high
canter.

"Go on and break your neck and mine too, if ye like," she sobbed. "Ye
needn't think I'll give an inch to _you;_ it's bad enough." When
Jamie, still snorting, still reckless with his feet, somehow managed
to pass over the boulder-strewn stretch without breaking a leg, Mary
Hope choked back the obstreperous lump in her throat and spoke again
in a quiet fury of resentment. "Burn it he may if he likes; I shall
_not_ put my foot again inside a house of the Lorrigans!"

Whereat Jamie threw up his head, shied at a white rock on the steep
slope beneath, loped through the sagebrush where the trail was almost
level, scrambled up a steep, deep-worn bit of trail, turned the sharp
corner of the switch-back and entered that rift in the cap-rock known
as the Slide.

Mary Hope had traveled that trail many times on Rab, a few years ago.
She had always entered the Slide with a little thrill along her spine,
knowing it for a place where Adventure might meet her face to
face--where Danger lurked and might one day spring out at her. To-day
she thought nothing about it until Jamie squatted and tried to whirl
back. Then she looked up and saw Adventure, Danger and Lance Lorrigan
just ahead, where the Slide was steepest.

Lance pulled up his hired horse, his thoughts coming back with a jerk
from the same disagreeable subject that had engrossed Mary Hope. The
hired horse jumped, tried his best not to sit down, lunged forward to
save himself, found himself held back with a strength that did not
yield an inch, and paused wild-eyed, his hind feet slipping and
scraping the rock.

Jamie in that moment was behaving much worse. Jamie, finding that he
could not turn around, was backing down the Slide, every step
threatening to land him in a heap. Mary Hope turned white, her eyes
staring up at Lance a little above her. In that instant they both
remembered the short turn of the switch-back, and the twelve-foot bank
with the scrambling trail down which no horse could walk backwards and
keep his legs under him.

"Loosen the reins and spur him!" Lance's voice sounded hollow, pent
within that rock-walled slit. In the narrow space he was crowding his
own horse against the right wall so that he might dismount.

Mary Hope leaned obediently forward, the reins hanging loose. "He
_always_ backs up when he's scared," she panted, when Jamie paid no
attention.

Instinctively Lance's hand felt for his rope. On the livery saddle
there did happen to be a poor sort of grass-rope riata, cheap and
stiff and clumsily coiled, but fortunately with a loop in the end.

"Don't lasso Jamie! He always fights a rope. He'll throw himself!"
Mary Hope's voice was strained and unnatural.

Lance flipped a kink out of the rope. In that narrow space the loop
must be a small one; he had one swift, sickening vision of what might
happen if the little loop tightened around her neck. "Put up your
hands--close to your head," he commanded her. "It's all right. Don't
be afraid--it's all right, girl--"

He shot the loop straight out and down at her, saw it settle over her
head, slip over her elbows, her shoulders. "It's all right--can you
get off!"

She tried, but the space was too narrow to risk it, with Jamie still
going backward in a brainless panic. He would have trampled her
beneath him had she done so.

"Stay on--but be all ready to jump when he leaves the Slide. Don't be
afraid--it's all right. He won't hurt you; he won't hurt you at all."
He was edging closer to the horse, holding the rope taut in his right
hand, his left ready to catch Jamie by the bridle once he came near
enough. His one fear was that the horse might fall before he was out
of the gash, and in falling might crush Mary Hope against the rocks.

As Lance came on, Jamie backed faster, his haunches dropped, his feet
slipping under him. Lance dared not crowd him, dared not reach for the
bridle, still more than an arm's length away. So Jamie came out of the
Slide backwards, saw with a sudden panic-stricken toss of his head
that he had open daylight all around him, whirled short and gave one
headlong leap away from the place that had terrified him so.

Lance jumped, reaching for Mary Hope as the horse went over the bank.
By the length of his hand he missed her, but the rope pulled her free
from Jamie, and she fell prone on the trail and lay still.

"Are you hurt? Good God! are you hurt?" Lance gathered her in his arms
and carried her to where the rock wall made a shady band across the
steep slope.

Mary Hope was very white, very limp, and her eyes were closed. On her
cheeks he saw where tears had lately been. Her mouth had a pitiful
little droop. He sat down, still holding her like a child, and felt
tentatively of her arms, her shoulders, vaguely prepared to feel the
crunch of a broken bone. There was no water nearer than the ranch.
Jamie, having rolled over twice, was lying on his side near a scraggly
buck-brush, looking back up the hill, apparently wondering whether it
would be worth while to get up. The hired horse, having found a niche
wherein to set his hind feet, stood staring down through the Slide,
afraid to come farther, unable to retreat.

One side of Mary Hope's face was dusty, the skin roughened with small
scratches where she had fallen. With his handkerchief Lance very
gently wiped away the dust, took off her hat and fanned her face,
watching absently two locks of hair that blew back and forth across
her forehead with the breeze made by the swaying hat brim.

She was not dead! She could not be dead, with that short fall. Then he
saw that she was breathing faintly, unevenly, and in another minute he
saw her lashes quiver against her tanned cheek. But her eyes did not
open, the color did not flow back into her face.

"Oh, girl--girl, wake up!" With a little shake he pulled her close to
him. "Open your eyes. I want to see your eyes. I want to see if they
are just as blue as ever. Girl--oh, you poor little girl!"

He had been hating her, furious at the insult she had given his
family. Angry as he was with the Lorrigans, resenting fiercely what
they had done, he had hated Mary Hope Douglas more, because the hurt
was more personal, struck deep into a part of his soul that had grown
tender. But he could not hate her now--not when she lay there in his
arms with her tear-stained cheek against his heart, her eyes shut,
and with that pathetic droop to her lips. Gently he tucked back the
locks of hair that kept blowing across her forehead. Very tenderly,
with a whimsical pretense at self-pity, he upbraided her for the
trouble she was giving him.

"Must I go clear down to the ranch and pack up water in my hat, and
slosh it on your face? I'll do that, girl, if you don't open your eyes
and look at me. _You're_ not hurt; _are_ you hurt? You'd better wake
up and tell me, or I'll have to take you right up in my arms and carry
you all the way down to the house, and ride like heck for a doctor,
and--"

"Ye will not!" she retorted faintly, and unexpectedly he was looking
into her eyes, bluer than he had remembered them; troubled,
questioning--but stubborn against his suggestion. She moved uneasily,
and he lifted her to the bank beside him and put one arm behind her,
so that she leaned against him.

"Oh, very well--then I will not. You'll walk with me to the house, and
we'll let Belle--"

"I will not! Never in my life will I enter the house of a Lorrigan!"
Mary Hope brushed a palm against her forehead, straightened herself as
if she resented her weakness, wished to hold herself aloof from him.
She did not look at Lance, but stared across the narrow valley to the
sage-clothed bluff beyond.

"Why not? You've just come from the Lorrigans, haven't you?" Lance
studied her face. "You must have, or you wouldn't be on this trail."

"I went down to pay for the schoolhouse, since your father took the
piano away.--And he would not take the money, and he said he would
burn the house if I don't teach in it--and I'll die before ever I'll
open the door again, unless he takes the money. And he said if I left
the money he would throw it down the crevice yonder--and he would _do_
it! And do you think I'll be under any obligation to Tom Lorrigan? You
called my father hard, but your father is the hardest man that ever
lived. The Lorrigans shall _not_--"

Lance laughed, set her hat wrong side before on her head, tucked the
elastic band under her chin, laughed again when she pettishly removed
it and set the hat straight. "I wouldn't worry over the schoolhouse
right now--nor Tom Lorrigan either," he said. "Look at your horse down
there. If you're all right, I'll go down and see how many bones he's
broken. You had a chance for a nasty pile-up. Do you know that?"

"I'm grateful," said Mary Hope soberly. "But it was Lorrigan meanness
brought me here; it was a Lorrigan got me into the trouble now, and a
Lorrigan got me out of it. It's _always_ the Lorrigans."

"Yes, and a Lorrigan's got to see you a little farther before you're
through with them, so cheer up." Lance laughed again, an amused
little chuckle that was calculated to take the droop out of Mary
Hope's lips, and failed completely.

He saw her cheeks were reddening, saw too that her face gave evidence
of no particular bodily pain. She had probably fainted from fright,
more than anything else, he decided, and her fright was now forgotten
in her animosity. He slid off the bank, went down to where Jamie lay,
took him by the bridle and urged him to stand. Which Jamie, after one
or two scrambling attempts, managed to do. But the horse was hurt. He
could scarcely hobble to the trail.

Without paying any visible attention to Mary Hope, Lance removed her
saddle from Jamie, and brought it up to where she sat dispiritedly
watching him. His manner was brisk, kind enough, but had an aloofness
which made her keenly aware that he accepted her adherence to the feud
and tacitly took his own place with the Lorrigans. Over this emergency
she felt that he had unspokenly set a flag of truce. His attitude
depressed her.

"There are just two things to do," he said, laying the saddle at her
feet. "You may ride that livery horse back home, and I'll come along
to-morrow and pick him up and take him in with me to Jumpoff; or you
can let me go down to the ranch and bring up a gentle horse, and you
can ride that home. I can get him when I come out to-morrow with my
traps. I advise you to take the gentle horse from the ranch, after the
shake-up you've had. This town horse is not easy gaited, by any means.
Your horse I'll manage to get down to the ranch and do what I can for
him. It's his shoulder, I think, from the way he acts. He may be all
right after a while."

Mary Hope looked distressfully at Jamie, standing dejected where Lance
had left him, his head sagging, every line of him showing how sick of
life he was. She glanced swiftly up at Lance, bent her head suddenly
and pressed the tips of her fingers along her cheek bones, wiping away
tears that came brimming over her eyelids.

"You'd better let me bring up a horse and take you home," Lance urged,
the caressing note creeping into his voice.

"Oh, no! I can't! I--what do I care how I get home? But if your father
won't take the money--You don't _know!_ The whole Rim talks and
gossips until I wish I were dead! And I can't go on using the
schoolhouse--and Tom Lorrigan says if I don't--" She was crying at
last, silently, miserably, her face hidden behind her hands.

"He'll take the money." Lance, after an indeterminate minute while he
watched her, laid his hand lightly on her shoulder. "I'll see that dad
takes it. And I'll give you a bill of sale that ought to shut the
Black Rim mouths. I'm a Lorrigan and I'm not going to apologize for
the blood that's in me, but I want you to know that if I had been home
on the night of the Fourth the Lorrigans wouldn't have done the rotten
cheap thing they did."

Mary Hope heard him tearing a leaf out of his memorandum book, looked
up at him while he wrote rapidly. Without any comment whatever he gave
her the paper, went up to where the hired horse stood, and coaxed it
down through the Slide. Quickly, with the deftness that told of
lifelong intimacy with horses and saddles, he set her own saddle on
the hired horse, while Mary Hope read the terse bill of sale that set
forth the legal "Ten dollars and other valuable considerations," and
was signed "Thomas Lorrigan, per L. M. Lorrigan." It all seemed very
businesslike, and heartened her so much that she was willing to be
nice to Lance Lorrigan. But Lance remained strictly neutral.

"I'll lead him up the Slide for you," he said unemotionally when the
horse was ready. "After he's over that, I think you'll be all right;
you're a good rider. And you need not feel under any obligations then
to the Lorrigans. I was practically through with the horse, anyway,
and it will be no trouble at all to drive by your place and get him
to-morrow."

"I can lead him up--" Mary Hope began, but Lance had already turned
the horse and started him up the Slide, so there was nothing for her
to do but follow.

At the top she gave him the money bag, which he took without any words
whatever on the subject. He held the horse until she had mounted, made
sure that she was all right, chilled by his perfect politeness her
nervous overture toward a more friendly parting, lifted his hat and
turned immediately to go back down the Slide.

Mary Hope glanced back over her shoulder and saw his bobbing hat
crown. "Ah, he's just a Lorrigan, and I hate them all. But he let me
pay--I'm quits with them now--and I'll never in my life speak to one
of them again!"




CHAPTER TWENTY

AS HE LIVED, SO HE DIED


Belle Lorrigan, with Lance beside her on the one seat of the swaying
buckboard, swung through the open gate of the Douglas yard and drove
to the sun-baked, empty corral. In the doorway of the house, as they
dashed past, the bent body of Mother Douglas appeared. She stood
staring after them, her eyes blurred with tears. "It's that huzzy, the
Lorrigan woman," she said flatly, wiping her face on her checked
apron, stiffly starched and very clean. "Do you go, Mary Hope, and get
them the horse they've come for. If Hugh were here--"

From somewhere within the house the voice of Aleck Douglas rose
suddenly in a high-keyed vindictive chanting. Mother Douglas turned,
but the old man came with a rush across the floor, brushed past her
and went swaying drunkenly to the corral, shouting meaningless
threats. After him went Mary Hope, her eyes wide, her skirt flapping
about her ankles as she ran.

"Oh, please do not pay any attention to father!" she cried, hurrying
to overtake him before he reached the buckboard. "He's out of his head
with pain, and he will not have a doctor--Father! listen! They only
came for the horse I borrowed yesterday--they're going directly--come
back and get into your bed, father!"

Aleck Douglas was picking up a broken neck yoke for a weapon when
Lance sprang out over a wheel and grappled with him. The old man's
right arm was swollen to twice its natural size and bandaged to his
shoulder. His eyes were bloodshot, his breath fetid with the fever
that burned him when he turned his face close to Lance.

"It's his arm makes him crazy," said Mary Hope breathlessly. "Last
night it began, and mother and I cannot keep him in his bed, and we
don't know _what_ to do! He will not have a doctor, he says--"

"He'd better have," said Belle shortly, hanging to the pintos that
danced and snorted at the excitement. "I'll send one out. Lance, you
better stay here and look after him--he'll kill somebody yet. Aren't
there any men on the place, for heaven's sake?"

Mary Hope said there wasn't, that Hugh was not expected back before
night. They had bought a horse from the Millers, and it had jumped the
fence and gone home, and Hugh had gone after it. Then she ran to do
what she could to calm her father. Scotty, it would seem, wanted to
drive the Lorrigans off his land because they were thieves and
cutthroats and had come there to rob him boldly in the broad light of
day.

"Bat him on the head if you have to, Lance," Belle called, cold-eyed
but capable. "He'll get sunstroke out here in this heat. And if you
can get him into the house you had better tie him down till a doctor
comes." Then she left, with the pintos circling in a lope to get out
through the gate and into the trail.

The last she saw of them, Lance and Mary Hope were both struggling
with the old man, forcing him foot by foot to the house, where Mother
Douglas stood on the doorstep crying, with her apron to her face.

She had the tough little team in a white lather, with their stubborn
heads hanging level with their knees, when she stopped at the little
railroad station and sent a peremptory wire to the Lava doctor who was
most popular in the Black Rim. She waited until he arrived on the
train which he luckily had time to catch, and then, the pintos
having somewhat recovered under the solicitous rubbing-down of a
hollow-chested stableman, she hustled the doctor and his black case
into the buckboard and made the return drive in one hour and fifty
minutes, which was breaking even her own record, who was called the
hardest driver in the whole Rim country.

They found Lance with his coat off and the perspiration streaming
down his face, battling with Aleck Douglas who was raving still of the
Lorrigans and threatening to kill this one who would not leave him
alone to die in peace. Mary Hope and her mother were in the hot little
kitchen where the last of the sunlight streamed through the faded
green mosquito netting that sagged in and out as the breeze of sundown
pushed through lazily.

The Lava doctor did not say much. He quieted the raving with his
hypodermic needle, removed the amateurish bandage from the hand and
the arm, looked at the wound, applied a cooling lotion, and
dexterously wound on a fresh bandage. It seemed very little, Mary Hope
thought dully, for a doctor to come all the way from Lava to do.

He would stay all night, he said. And the Lorrigans went home silent,
depressed, even Belle finding nothing to say.

"I'll ride over in the morning and see how he is," Lance observed, as
the tired little team climbed the Devil's Tooth Ridge. "I'll have to
get the horse, anyway."

The next morning, when he arrived rather early, he learned from Mary
Hope that her father had died just before daylight, and that Hugh had
not come back, and the doctor wanted to be taken to Jumpoff, and she
could not leave her mother there alone, and a coffin must be ordered,
and she did not know _what_ to do. She was past tears, it seemed to
Lance. She was white and worn and worried, and there was something in
her eyes that made them too tragic to look at. He stood just outside
the kitchen door and talked with her in a low voice so that Mother
Douglas, weeping audibly in the kitchen, need not know he was there.

"The doctor can ride that livery horse in," he said soothingly. "And
I'll wire to Lava for anything that you want, and notify any friends
you would like to have come and see you through this." He was very
careful not to accent the word friends, but Mary Hope gave him a
quick, pathetic glance when he said it.

"You've been kind--I--I can't say just what I would like to say--but
you've been kinder than some friends would be."

She left the doorstep and walked with him to the stable, Lance leading
his horse and slowing his pace to match her weary steps. "It--seems
unreal, like something I'm dreaming. And--and I hope you won't pay any
attention to what father--said. He was out of his mind, and while he
had the belief, he--"

"I'd rather not talk about that," Lance interrupted quietly. "Your
father believed that we're all of us thieves, that we stole his stock.
Perhaps you believe it--I don't know. We've a hard name, got when the
country was hard and it took hard men to survive. I don't think the
Lorrigans, when you come right down to it, were any worse than their
neighbors. They're no worse now. They got the name of being worse,
just because they were--well, stronger; harder to bully, harder to
defeat. The Lorrigans could hold their own and then some. They're
still holding their own. There never was a Lorrigan ever yet backed
down from anything, so I'm not going to back down from the name the
Rim has given us. I'm _glad_ I'm a Lorrigan. But I'm not glad to have
you hate me for it."

They were at the stable door, which Mary Hope pulled open. The hired
horse stood in the second stall. Lance dropped the reins of his own
horse, turned to Mary Hope and laid his hands on her shoulders,
looking down enigmatically into her upturned, troubled face.

"Girl, don't let us worry you at all. You've got trouble enough, and
I'm going to do all I can to help you through it. I'll send out
friends; and then the Lorrigans won't bother you. We won't come to the
funeral, because your father wouldn't like to see us around, and your
mother wouldn't like to see us around, and you--"

"Oh, don't!" Mary Hope drooped her face until her forehead rested on
Lance's arm.

Lance quivered a little. "Girl--girl, what is it about you that drives
a man mad with tenderness for you, sometimes?" He slipped his free arm
around her shoulders, pressed her close. "Oh, girl--girl! Don't hate
Lance--just because he's a Lorrigan. Be fairer than that." He bent
his head to kiss her, drew himself suddenly straight, his brows
frowning.

"There--run back and ask your mother what all she would like to have
done for her in town, and tell the doctor that I'll have the horse
ready for him in about two minutes. And be game--just go on being
game. Your friends will be here just as soon as I can get them here."
He turned into the stable and began saddling the horse.

Mary Hope, after a moment of indecision, went back to the house,
walking slowly, as though she dreaded entering again to take up the
heavy burden of sorrow that must be borne with all its sordid details,
all the meaningless little conventions that attend the passing of a
human soul. She had not loved her father very much. He was not a man
to be loved. But his going was a bereavement, would leave a desolate
emptiness in her life. Her mother would fill with weeping reminiscence
the hours she would have spent in complaining of his harshness. She
herself must somehow take charge of the ranch, must somehow fill her
father's place that seemed all at once so big, so important in her
world.

She looked back, wistfully, saw Lance leading out the horse. He had
told her to be game--to go on being game. She wondered if he knew just
how hard it was going to be for her. He had said that the Lorrigans
were strong, were harder to defeat, had always held their own. He was
proud because of their strength! She lifted her head, carefully wiped
the tears from her cheeks--Mary Hope seemed always to be wiping tears
from her cheeks lately!--and opened the door. The Lorrigans? Very
well, there was also the Douglas blood, and that was not weaker than
the Lorrigan.

She was quite calm, quite impersonal when she gave Lance a list of the
pitifully small errands she and her mother would be grateful if he
would perform for them. Her lips did not quiver, her hands did not
tremble when she took her father's old red morocco wallet from the
bureau drawer and gave Lance money to pay for the things they would
need. Or if he would just hand the list to the Kennedys, she told him,
they would be glad to attend to everything and save him the bother.
They would come out at once, and perhaps Mrs. Smith would come. She
thanked him civilly for the trouble he had already taken and added a
message of thanks for Belle. She thanked him for the use of the horse
and for attending to the schoolhouse matter for her. She was so
extremely thankful that Lance exploded in one two-word oath when he
rode away. Whereupon the doctor, who knew nothing of Lance's thoughts,
looked at him in astonishment.




CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

LANCE TRAILS A MYSTERY


Lance, rising at what he considered an early hour--five in the morning
may well be considered early,--went whistling down to the corral to
see what plans were on for the day. It was the day of Aleck Douglas's
funeral, but the Devil's Tooth outfit would be represented only by a
wreath of white carnations which Belle had ordered sent up from
Pocatello. White carnations and Aleck Douglas did not seem to
harmonize, but neither did the Devil's Tooth and Aleck Douglas, and
the white wreath would be much less conspicuous and far more
acceptable than the Lorrigans, Lance was thinking.

He paused at the bunk-house and looked in. The place was deserted. He
walked through it to the kitchen where the boys ate--the chuck-house,
they called it--and found nothing to indicate that a meal had been
eaten there lately. He went out and down to the stable, where Sam
Pretty Cow was just finishing his stall cleaning. Shorty, who now had
a permanently lame leg from falling under his horse up in the Lava
Beds a year ago, was limping across the first corral with two full
milk buckets in his hands.

"Say, what time does this ranch get up, for heck sake?" Lance inquired
of Sam Pretty Cow, stepping aside so that Sam might carry in a forkful
of fresh hay.

"I dunno--long time ago." Sam Pretty Cow turned the hay sidewise and
went in to stuff his fragrant burden into the manger.

"I was going out with the boys, if they went anywhere. Where have they
all headed for, Sam? I could overtake them, maybe."

Sam Pretty Cow, returning to the doorway, shifted a quid of tobacco
from one cheek to the other and grinned.

"I dunno, me," he responded amiably.

"You don't _know?_ Didn't dad say anything? Didn't the boys?" And
then, with faint exasperation, "Doesn't any one ever talk any more on
this ranch?"

Sam Pretty Cow gave him a swift, oblique glance and spat accurately at
a great horsefly that had lighted on a board end.

"Not much, you bet. Nh-hn."

Lance called to Shorty, who had set his milk buckets down that he
might open the little gate that swung inward,--the gate which horses
were not supposed to know anything about.

"Oh-h, Shorty! Where did dad and the boys go this morning?"

Shorty turned slowly, pulling the gate open and propping it with a
stick until he had set the buckets through. Deliberation was in his
manner, deliberation was in his speech.

"Las' night, you mean. They hit out right after midnight."

"Well, where did they _go?_" Lance ground his cigarette under his
heel.

"You might ask 'em when they git back," Shorty suggested cryptically,
and closed the gate just as carefully as if forty freedom-hungry
horses were milling inside the corral.

Lance watched him go and turned to Sam Pretty Cow who, having thrust
his hay fork behind a brace in the stable wall, was preparing to vary
his tobacco-chewing with a smoke.

"What's the mystery, Sam? Where did they go? I'm here to stay, and I'm
one of the family--I _think_--and you may as well tell me."

Sam Pretty Cow lipped the edge of his cigarette paper, folded it down
smoothly on the tiny roll of tobacco, leaned his body backward and
painstakingly drew a match from the small pocket of his grimy blue
overalls.

"I'm don' _know_ nothing," he vouchsafed equably. "I'm don' ask
nothing. I'm don' hear nothing. You bet. Nh-hn--yore damn right."

From under his lashes Lance watched Sam Pretty Cow. "I was over
helping hold old Scotty in his bed, the other day," he said
irrelevantly. "He was crazy--out of his head. He kept yelling that
the Lorrigans were stealing his stock. He kept saying that a few more
marks with a straight branding iron would turn his Eleven into an NL,
ANL, DNL, LNL--any one of the Devil's Tooth brands. Crazy with fever,
he was."

Sam Pretty Cow studied the match, decided which was the head of it,
and drew it sharply along his boot sole.

"Yeah--yo're damn right. Crazy, you bet yore life. Uh-huh."

"He said the Miller's Block brand could easily be turned into the N
Block--Belle's brand. He said horses had been run off the range--"

"He's dead," Sam observed unemotionally. "You bet. He's gettin'
fun'ral to-day."

"How long will the boys be out?" Lance pulled a splinter off the rail
beside him and began separating the fibers with his finger nails that
were too well cared for to belong to the Black Rim folk.

"I dunno, me."

"Scotty sure was crazy, Sam. He tried twice to kill me. Once he jumped
up and ran into the kitchen and grabbed a butcher knife off the table
and came at me. He thought I was there to rob him. He called me Tom."

"Yeah," said Sam Pretty Cow, blowing smoke. "He's damn lucky you ain't
Tom. Uh-huh--you bet."

Lance lifted his eyebrows, was silent while he watched Shorty limping
down from the house, this time with table scraps for the chickens.

"Scotty was certainly crazy," Lance turned again to Sam. "Over and
over he kept saying, while he looked up at the ceiling, 'The Lorrigan
days are numbered. Though the wicked flourish like a green bay tree,
they shall perish as dry grass. The days are numbered--their evil days
are numbered.'"

Sam Pretty Cow smoked, flicked the ash from his cigarette with a
coppery forefinger, looked suddenly full at Lance and grinned widely.

"Uh-huh. So's them stars numbered, all right. I dunno, me. Tom
Lorrigan's damn smart man." He reached down for an old bridle and
grinned again. "Scotty, I guess he don' say how many numbers them days
is, you bet." He started off, trailing his bridle reins carelessly in
the dust.

"If you're going to catch up a horse, Sam, I wish you'd haze in the
best one on the ranch for me."

Sam Pretty Cow paused, half turned, spat meditatively into the dust
and jerked a thumb toward the stable.

"Me, I dunno. Bes' horse on the ranch is in them box stall. Them's
Coaley. I guess you don' want Coaley, huh?"

Lance bit his lip, looking at Sam Pretty Cow intently.

"You needn't catch up a horse for me, Sam. I'll ride Coaley," he said
smoothly. Which brought a surprised grunt from Sam Pretty Cow, Indian
though he was, accustomed though he was to the ways of the Lorrigans.

But it was not his affair if Lance and his father quarreled when Tom
returned. Indeed, Tom might not return very soon, in which case he
would not hear anything about Lance's audacity unless Lance himself
told it. Sam Pretty Cow would never mention it, and Shorty would not
say a word. Shorty never did say anything if he could by any means
keep silence.

Lance returned to the house, taking long strides that, without seeming
hurried, yet suggested haste. He presently came down the path again,
this time with a blanket roll and a sack with lumpy things tied in the
bottom. He wore chaps, his spurs, carried a yellow slicker over his
arm. On his head was a black Stetson, one of Tom's discarded old
hats.

He led Coaley from the box stall where he had never before seen him
stand, saddled him, tied his bundles compactly behind the cantle,
mounted and rode down the trail, following the hoof prints that showed
freshest in the loose, gravelly sand. Coaley, plainly glad to be out
of his prison, stepped daintily along in a rocking half trot that
would carry him more miles in a day than any other horse in the
country could cover, and bring him to the journey's end with springy
gait and head held proudly, ears twitching, ready for more miles if
his rider wanted more.

The tracks led up the road to the Ridge, turned sharply off where the
brush grew scanty among the flat rocks that just showed their faces
above the surface of the arid soil. Lance frowned and followed. For a
long way he skirted the rim rock that edged the sheer bluff. A scant
furlong away, on his right, a trail ran west to the broken land of
Indian Creek. But since the horsemen had chosen to keep to the rocky
ground along the rim, Lance followed.

He had gone perhaps a mile along the bluff when Coaley began to toss
up his head and perk his ears backward, turning now and then to look.
Lance was sunk too deep in bitter introspection to observe these first
warning movements which every horseman knows. He was thinking of Mary
Hope, who would be waking now to a day of sorrowful excitement.
Thinking, too, of old Aleck Douglas and the things that he had said in
his raving.

What Douglas had shouted hoarsely was not true, of course. He did not
believe,--and yet, there was Shorty's enigmatical answer to a simple
question; there was Sam Pretty Cow, implying much while he actually
said very little; there was this unheralded departure of all the
Devil's Tooth riders in the night, in the season between round-ups.
There was Coaley feeling fit for anything, shut up in the box stall
while Tom rode another horse; and here was Lance himself taking the
trail of the Devil's Tooth outfit at a little after sunrise on a horse
tacitly forbidden to all riders save Tom.

Coaley, in a place where he must pick his way between boulders, paused
and lifted his head, staring back the way they had come. Lance roused
himself from gloomy speculations and looked back also, but he could
not see anything behind them save a circling hawk and the gray
monotone of the barren plateau, so he urged Coaley in among the
boulders.

There must be something back there, of course. Coaley was too
intelligent a horse to make a mistake. But it might be some drifting
range stock, or perhaps a stray horse. Certainly it was no one from
the Devil's Tooth, for Sam Pretty Cow had set off to mend a fence in
the lower pasture, and Shorty never rode a horse nowadays for more
than a half mile or so; and six o'clock in the morning would be rather
early for chance riders from any other ranch. With a shrug, Lance
dismissed the matter from his mind.

Where a faint, little-used trail went obliquely down the bluff to the
creek bottom, Lance saw again the hoofprints which the rocky ground
had failed to reveal. He could see no reason for taking this
roundabout course to go up the creek, but he sent Coaley down the
trail, reached the bottom and discovered that the tracks once more
struck off into rocky ground. His face hardened until his resemblance
to Tom became more marked than usual, but where the tracks led he
followed. Too often had he trailed stray horses in the past to be
puzzled now, whether he could see the hoofprints or not.

They must have made for the other side of the creek, gone up Wild
Horse gulch or the Little Squaw. There was just one place where they
could cross the creek without bogging in the tricky mud that was
almost as bad as quicksand. He therefore pulled out of the rocky patch
and made straight for the crossing. He would soon know if they had
crossed there. If they had not, then they would have turned again up
Squaw Creek, and it would be short work cutting straight across to the
only possible trail to the higher country.

He had covered half of the distance to the creek when Coaley again
called his attention to something behind him. This time Lance glimpsed
what looked very much like the crown of a hat moving in a dry wash
that he had crossed not more than five minutes before. He pulled up,
studied the contour of the ground behind him, looked ahead, saw the
mark of a shod hoof between two rocks. The hoof mark pointed toward
the crossing. Lance, however, turned down another small depression
where the soil lay bare and Coaley left clean imprints, trotted along
it until a welter of rocks made bad footing for the horse, climbed
out and went on level. Farther up the valley an abrupt curve in Squaw
Creek barred his way with scraggly, thin willow growth that had
winding cow trails running through it. Into one of these Lance turned,
rode deep into the sparse growth, stopped where the trail swung round
a huge, detached boulder, dismounted and dropped Coaley's reins to the
ground and retraced his steps some distance from the trail, stepping
on rocks here and there and keeping off damp spots.

He reached the thin edge of the grove, stood behind a stocky bush and
waited. In two or three minutes--they seemed ten to Lance--he saw the
head and shoulders of a rider just emerging from the gully he himself
had so lately followed.

Back on Coaley, following the winding trail, Lance pondered the
matter. The way he had come was no highway--no trail that any rider
would follow on any business save one. But just why should he be
followed? He had thought at first that some one was trailing the
Devil's Tooth outfit, as he had been doing, but now it seemed plain
that he himself was the quarry.

He flicked the reins on Coaley's satiny neck, and the horse broke at
once into a springy, swift trot, following the purposeless winding of
the cow path. When they emerged upon the other side where the creek
gurgled over a patch of rocks like cobblestones, Lance stopped and let
him take a sip or two of water, then struck off toward the bluff,
letting Coaley choose his own pace, taking care that he kept to low
ground where he could not be seen.

For an hour he rode and came to the junction of Mill Creek and the
Squaw. Then, climbing through chokecherry thickets up a draw that led
by winding ways to higher ground, Lance stopped and scrutinized the
bottomland over which he had passed. Coaley stood alert, watching also
that back trail, his ears turned forward, listening. After a moment,
he began to take little mincing steps sidewise, pulling impatiently at
the reins. As plainly as a horse could tell it, Coaley implored Lance
to go on. But Lance waited until, crossing an open space, he saw a
rider coming along at a shambling trot on the trail he had himself
lately followed.

He frowned thoughtfully, turned Coaley toward home and rode swiftly in
a long, distance-devouring lope.

He reached the ranch somewhere near ten o'clock, surprising Belle in
the act of harnessing her pintos to a new buckboard at which they
shied hypocritically. Belle stared at him round-eyed over the backs of
her team.

"My good Lord, Lance! You--you could be Tom's twin, in that hat and on
that horse! What you been doing--doubling for him in a lead?"

Lance swung down and came toward her. "Belle, where did dad and the
boys go?"

"Oh--fussing with the stock," said Belle vaguely, her eyes clouding a
little. "We're getting so many cattle it keeps Tom on the go day and
night, seems to me. And he _will_ keep buying more all the while.
Did--did you want to go with them, honey? I guess Tom never thought
you might. You've been away so long. You'd better not ride Coaley,
Lance. Tom would just about murder you if he caught you at it. And
where did you get hold of that hat?"

Lance laughed queerly. "I just picked it off the table as I came out.
Mine is too new and stiff yet. This seemed to fit. And Coaley's better
off under the saddle than he is in the stable, Belle. He's a peach--I
always did want to ride Coaley, but I never had the nerve till I got
big enough to lick dad."

He caught Belle in a quick, breath-taking hug, kissed her swiftly on
the cheek and turned Coaley into the corral with the saddle still on.

"Are you going over--to the funeral?" he asked as he closed the gate.

"I'm going to town, and I've got the letters you left on the table to
be mailed. No, I'm not going to the funeral. I don't enjoy having my
face slapped--and being called a painted Jezebel," she added dryly.

Under his breath Lance muttered something and went into the house, not
looking at Belle or making her any reply.

"Lance," said Belle to the pintos, "thinks we're rough and tough and
just about half civilized. Lord, when you take a Lorrigan and educate
him and _polish_ him, you sure have got a combination that's hard to
go up against. Two years--and my heavens, I don't _know_ Lance any
more! I never thought any Lorrigan could feaze _me_--but there's
something about Lance--"

In the house Lance was not showing any of the polish which Belle had
mentioned rather regretfully. He was kneeling before a trunk, throwing
books and pipes and socks and soft-toned silk shirts over his
shoulder, looking for something which he seemed in a great haste to
find. When his fingers, prying deep among his belongings, closed upon
the thing he sought, he brought it up, frowning abstractedly.

A black leather case, small and curved, opened when he unbuckled the
confining strap. A binocular, small but extremely efficient in its
magnifying power he withdrew, dusting the lenses with the sleeve of
his shirt. He had bought the glasses because some one had advised him
to take a pair along when he went with a party of friends to the top
of Mount Tamalpais one Sunday. And because he had an instinctive
dislike for anything but the best obtainable, he had bought the
highest-priced glasses he could find in San Francisco,--and perhaps
the smallest. He buckled them back into their case, slapped them into
his pocket and closed the trunk lid with a bang. From the mantel in
the living room he gleaned a box of cartridges for an extra
six-shooter, which he cleaned and loaded carefully and tucked inside
the waistband of his trousers, on the left side, following an instinct
that brought him close to his grandfather, that old killer whom all
men feared to anger.

"The horse and the hat; he thought it was dad he was trailing!" he
said to himself, with his teeth clamped tight together. "Oh, well,
when it comes to that kind of a game--"

He went out and down to the corral, watered Coaley and mounted again,
taking the trail across pastures to Squaw Creek.




CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

LANCE RIDES ANOTHER TRAIL


With a two-days' growth of beard on his chin and jaws, a new, hard
look in his eyes and the general appearance of a man who has been
riding long and has slept in all his clothes, Lance rode quietly up to
the corral gate and dismounted. A certain stiffness was in his walk
when he led Coaley inside and turned a stirrup up over the saddle
horn, his gloved fingers dropping to the latigo. Lance was tired--any
one could see that at a glance. That he was preoccupied, and that his
preoccupation was not pleasant, was also evident to the least
observing eye.

Tom, coming out of the bunk house, studied him with narrowed lids as
he came walking leisurely down to the corral. Tom's movements also
betrayed a slight stiffness of the muscles, as though he had ridden
hard and long. He did not hurry. Lance had pulled off the saddle and
the sweaty blanket and the bridle, and had turned Coaley into the
corral before he knew that some one was coming. Even then he did not
turn to look. He was staring hard at a half-dozen horses grouped in
the farther corner of the corral,--horses with gaunt flanks and the
wet imprint of saddles. They were hungrily nosing fresh piles of hay,
and scarcely looked up when Coaley trotted eagerly up to join them.
Six of them--a little more than half of the outfit that had ridden
away the other night.

"Well! I see you helped yourself to a new saddle horse," Tom observed
significantly, coming up behind Lance.

"Yes. Coaley acted lonesome, shut up in the box stall. Thought a
little riding would do him good." Lance's eyes met Tom's calmly,
almost as if the two were mere acquaintances.

"You give him a plenty, looks like. Where yuh been?"

"I? Oh--just riding around." Lance stooped indifferently to untie his
slicker and blanket from the saddle.

"Thought I'd like to use him myself. Thinking some of riding into town
this afternoon," Tom said, still studying Lance.

"Well, if you want to ride Coaley, he's good for it. I'd say he has
more miles in him yet than any of that bunch over there." With slicker
and blanket roll Lance started for the house.

Tom did not say anything. He was scowling thoughtfully after Lance
when Belle, coming from the chicken house with a late hatching of
fluffy little chicks in her hat, looked at him inquiringly. To her
Tom turned with more harshness than he had shown for many a long day.

"Schoolin' don't seem to set good on a Lorrigan," he said. "How long's
he goin' to stay this time?"

"Why, honey, don't you _want_ Lance home? He rode Coaley--but that's
no crime. Lance wouldn't hurt him, he's too good a rider and he never
was hard on horses. And Coaley just goes _wild_ when he has to stand
shut up all day--"

"Oh, it ain't riding Coaley, altogether. He can ride Coaley and be
darned. It's the new airs he's putting on that don't set good with me,
Belle. You wanted to make something of Lance, and now, by Henry,
you'll have to name the job you've made of him--I'd hate to!"

Belle put a hand into the cheeping huddle in her hat, lifted out a
chick and held it to her cheek. "Why, you're just imagining that Lance
is different," she contended, stifling her own recognition of the
change. "He'll settle right down amongst the boys--"

"The boys ain't cryin' to have him, Belle. Black Rimmers had ought to
stay Black Rimmers, or get out and stay out. Lance ain't either one
thing or the other."

"Why, Tom Lorrigan!" Belle dropped the chick into her hat and tucked
the hat under her arm. Her eyes began to sparkle a little. "I don't
think Lance liked it about the piano, but he's the same Lance he
always was. I've watched him, and he hasn't said a thing or done a
thing outa the way--he's just the _dearest_ great big fellow! And I
can't for the life of me see why you and the whole outfit hang back
from him like he was a stranger. Education ain't catching, Tom. And
Lance don't put on any airs at all, so why in the name of heaven you
all--"

"Well, well, don't get all excited, Belle. But if education was
ketching, a lot of the boys would be rollin' their beds. I'm going to
town. Anything yuh want brought out?"

Belle did not answer. She went away to the house with her hatful of
chicks, and put them into a box close to the stove until the mother
hen made sure whether the four other eggs were anything more than just
stale eggs. It would have been hard for Belle to explain just what the
heaviness in her heart portended. Certainly it was not in her nature
to worry over trifles,--yet these were apparent trifles that worried
her. On the surface of the Devil's Tooth life only faint ripples
stirred, but Belle felt somehow as though she were floating in a frail
boat over a quiet pool from whose depths some unspeakable monster
might presently thrust an ominous head and drag her under.

In the crude yet wholly adequate bathroom she heard a great splashing,
and guessed that it was Lance, refreshing himself after his trip.
That, she supposed, was another point that set him apart from the
other boys. From June to September, whenever any of the male
inhabitants of the Devil's Tooth felt the need of ablutions beyond the
scope of a blue enamel wash basin, he took a limp towel and rode down
across the pasture to the creek, and swam for half an hour or so in a
certain deep pool. Sometimes all of the boys went, at sundown, and
filled the pool with their splashings. Only Lance availed himself of
tub and soap and clean towels, and shaved every morning before
breakfast.

She heard him moving about in his room, heard him go into the kitchen
and ask Riley what the chances were for something to eat. She did not
follow him, but she waited, expecting that he would come into the
living room afterwards. She went to the piano and drummed a few bars
of a new dance hit Lance had brought home for her, and with her head
turned sidewise listened to the sound of his footsteps in the next
room, his occasional, pleasantly throaty tones answering Riley's
high-pitched, nasal twang.

Her eyes blurred with unreasoning tears. He was her youngest. He was
so big, so handsome, so like Tom,--yet so different! She did not
believe that Tom could really see anything to cavil at in Lance's
presence, in his changed personality. Tom, she thought, was secretly
as proud of Lance as she was, and only pretended to sneer at him to
hide that pride. The constraint would soon wear off, and Lance would
be one of the boys again.

The screen door slammed. With a lump in her throat, Belle went to a
window and looked out. Lance, in his new Stetson and a fresh shirt and
gray trousers tucked into his riding boots, was on his way to the
stable again. She watched him pick up a rope and go into the far
corral where a few extra saddle horses dozed through the hot
afternoon. She saw him return, leading a chunky little roan. Saw him
throw his saddle on the horse. Saw him ride off--the handsomest young
fellow in all the Black Rim--but with apparently never a thought that
his mother might like a word with him, since he had been gone for two
days without any explanation or any excuse. Which was not like Lance,
who had always before remembered to be nice to Belle.

Up the Slide trail Lance rode, perhaps two hours behind Tom. The marks
of Coaley's hoofs were still fresh in the trail, but Lance did not
appear to see them at all. He let the roan scramble over the shale as
he would, let him take his own pace among the boulders and up through
the Slide. At the top he put him into an easy lope which did not
slacken until he reached the descent on the other side of the Ridge.

Presently, because the roan was an ambitious young horse and eager to
reach the end of the trail, and Lance was too preoccupied to care
what pace he traveled, they arrived at Cottonwood Spring, circled the
wire fence and whipped in through the open gate at a gallop.

The little schoolhouse was deserted. Lance dismounted and looked in,
saw it still dismal with the disorder of the last unfortunate dance.
It was evident that there had been no school since the Fourth of
July.

Then he remembered that Mary Hope's father had been sick all of the
week, and it was now only two days since the funeral. She would not be
teaching school so soon after his death.

He closed the door and remounted, his face somber. He had wanted to
see Mary Hope. Since the morning after Scotty died he had fought a
vague, disquieting sense of her need of him. There had been times when
it seemed almost as though she had called to him across the distance;
that she wished to see him. To-day he had obeyed the wordless call. He
still felt her need of him, but since she was not at the school he
hesitated. The schoolhouse was in a measure neutral ground. Riding
over to the Douglas ranch was another matter entirely. Too keenly had
he felt the cold animosity of Mother Douglas, the wild, impotent hate
of old Scotty mouthing threats and accusations and vague prophecies of
future disaster to the Lorrigans. He rode slowly out through the gate
and took the trail made by the Devil's Tooth team when they hauled
down the materials for the schoolhouse. The chunky roan climbed
briskly, contentedly rolling the cricket in his bit. The little
burring sound of it fitted itself somehow to the thought reiterating
through Lance's tired brain. "She wouldn't want me--to come. She
wouldn't--want me--to come."

The roan squatted and ducked sidewise, and Lance raised his head. Down
the rough trail rode a big cowpuncher with sun-reddened face and an
air of great weariness. His horse plodded wearily, thin-flanked, his
black hair sweat-roughened and dingy. The rider looked at Lance with
red-veined eyes, the inflamed lids showing sleepless nights.

"How'r yuh?" he greeted perfunctorily, as they passed each other.

"Howdy," said Lance imperturbably, and rode on.

Lance's eyebrows pulled together. He had no need of looking back; he
had seen a great deal in the one glance he had given the stranger. He
scrutinized the trail, measured with his eyes the size and the shape
of the horse's footprints.

After a little he left the wagon road and put the roan to the steep
climb up the trail to the great Tooth of the ridge. He still frowned,
still rode with bent head, his eyes on the trail. But now he was
alert, conscious of his surroundings, thinking of every yard of ground
they covered.

At a little distance from the base of the Tooth he dismounted, tying
the restive roan to a bush to prevent him from wandering around,
nibbling investigatingly at weeds, bushes, all the things that
interest a young horse.

Slowly, walking carefully on rocks, Lance approached the Tooth. A new
look was in his face now,--a look half tender, half angry because of
the tenderness. Several times he had met Mary Hope here at the Tooth,
when he was just a long-legged youth with a fondness for teasing, and
she was a slim, wide-eyed little thing in short skirts and sunbonnet.
Always the meetings had pretended to be accidental, and always Mary
Hope had seemed very much interested in the magnificent outlook and
very slightly interested in him.

From the signs, some one else was much interested in the view. Lance
came upon a place where a man had slipped with one foot and left the
deep mark of his boot in the loose, gravelly soil. Sitting on a
boulder, he made a leisurely survey of the place and counted three
cigarette stubs that had fallen short of the crevice toward which they
had evidently been flung. How many had gone into the crevice he could
not tell. He slid off the boulder and, walking on a rock shelf that
jutted out from the huge upthrust rock, examined the place very
thoroughly.

At a certain spot where Mary Hope had been fond of sitting on the rock
shelf with her straight little back against the Tooth's smooth side,
a splendid view of the Devil's Tooth ranch was to be had. The house
itself was hidden in a cottonwood grove that Belle had planted when
she was a bride, but the corrals, the pastures, the road up the Ridge
was plainly visible. And in the shallow crack in the rock was another
cigarette end, economically smoked down to a three-quarter-inch stub.

Lance returned by way of the shelf to the outcropping of rocks that
would leave no trace of his passing. He untied and mounted the roan
and circled the vicinity cautiously. Two hundred yards away, down the
slope and on a small level place where the brush grew thick, he found
where a horse had stood for hours. He looked at the hoofprints, turned
back and rode down the schoolhouse trail again, following the tracks
of the fagged black horse.

When another fifty yards would bring the basin in sight, Lance turned
off the trail and dismounted, tied the roan again and went forward
slowly, his eyes intent on the tops of the trees around Cottonwood
Spring. A rattler buzzed suddenly, and he stopped, looked to see where
the snake was coiled, saw it withdraw its mottled gray body from under
a rabbit weed and drag sinuously away, its ugly head lifted a little,
eyes watching him venomously. An unwritten law of the West he broke by
letting the snake go. Again he moved forward, from bush to bush, from
boulder to boulder. When all of the basin and the grove were revealed
to him, he stopped, removed his gray range hat and hung it on a
near-by bush. He took his small field glasses from his pocket, dusted
the lenses deliberately and, leaning forward across a rock with his
elbows steadied on the stone and the glasses to his eyes, he swept
foot by foot the grove.

He was some minutes in discovering a black horse well within the outer
fringe of the cottonwoods, switching mechanically at the flies and
mosquitoes that infested the place, and throwing his head impatiently
to his side now and then when the sting was too sharp to ignore. With
the glasses he could see the sweat-roughened hide ripple convulsively
to dislodge the pestering insects, could see the flaring nostrils as
the horse blew out the dust gathered from his hungry nosing amongst
the coarse grass and weeds. The man Lance did not at once discover,
but after a little he saw him rolled in canvas to protect himself from
the mosquitoes. He seemed already fast asleep.

"He needs it," said Lance grimly, with his twisted smile, and went
back to the roan.




CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

LANCE PLAYS THE GAME


That night Lance sauntered into the bunk house, placidly ignoring the
fact that Tom was there, and that some sort of intermittent conference
was taking place. Cool and clean and silk-shirted and freshly shaved,
the contrast was sharp between him and the men sprawled on their beds
or sitting listlessly around the table playing keno. Tom lifted an
eyebrow at him; Lance sent him a look to match and went over to the
card players.

They did not want him in the bunk house. He who had spent nearly all
of his life on the Devil's Tooth ranch knew that he was not wanted.
They did not want him to know that he was not wanted, and by their
very effort to hide it did they betray themselves.

"Didn't go to Jumpoff after all, dad," Lance remarked idly, a rising
inflection turning the phrase into a question.

Tom grunted and got up to go. His men cast furtive glances at one
another, looked at Lance from under their brows, noted the silk
shirt and the low, tan Oxfords, and the texture and cut of his
gray trousers with the tan leather belt that had a small silver
buckle. Plain as it was they knew that buckle was silver. They saw
how clean-cut was the hairline at the back of his head and over his
ears--sure sign that he was "citified." And toward the man who is
citified your purely range-bred product cherishes a distinct if
secret grudge. His immaculate presence made them all feel frowsy and
unwashed and ill-clad. And to hide how conscious he was of his own
deficiencies, the man who sat nearest Lance lifted his hat and
rumpled his hair still more.

"Duke and Al didn't get in yet, eh?" Lance picked up an extra deck of
cards and began to shuffle them absent-mindedly but nevertheless
dexterously.

"Nope--they stayed out," replied a blond man named Winters. They
called him "Chilly."

"Hot weather for working cattle," Lance observed indifferently.

"Yeah--sure is," responded Ed Moran, who was low-browed and dark and
had an ugly jaw.

"Yeah--_damn_ hot," testified Jim Bloom. "How's Californy for
weather?"

"Oh-h--it has all kinds, same as here." Lance did not want to talk
about California just then, but he followed the lead easily enough.
"You can get anything you want in California. In two hours you can go
from twenty-five feet of snow to orange groves. You can have it all
green, fruit trees and roses blooming in midwinter, or you can hit
into desert worse than anything Idaho can show."

"Yep--that's right, all right. Great place, Californy," Chilly tried
to make his voice sound enthusiastic, and failed. "Great place."

"Speaking about climate--" Lance sat down on a corner of the table,
eased his trousers over his knees, crossed his tan Oxfords and began
a story. It was a long story, and for some time it was not at all
apparent that he was getting anywhere with it. He shuffled the deck
of cards while he talked, and the keno game, interrupted when he
began, trailed off into "Who's play is it?" and finally ceased
altogether. That was when Lance's Jewish dialect began to be funny
enough to make even Chilly Winters laugh. At the end there was a
general cachinnation.

"But that's only a sample of the stuff they pull out there, on
tourists," said Lance, when the laughter had subsided to a few belated
chuckles. "There's another one. It isn't funny--but I'm going to
_make_ it funny. You'll think it's funny--but it isn't, really."

He told that one and made them think it was funny. At least they
laughed, and laughed again when he had finished.

"Now here's another. This one really is funny--but you won't feel like
laughing at it. I'll tell it so you won't."

He told that story and saw it fall flat. "You see?" He flipped the
cards, tossed them on the table with a whimsical gesture. "It isn't
what you do in this world--it's how you do it that counts. I'm sitting
on your keno game, am I? All right, I'll get off."

He went out as abruptly as he had entered, and he paused long enough
outside to know that a silence marked his going. Then he heard Ed
Koran's voice depreciating him. Frankly he listened, lighting a
cigarette.

"Aw--his mother was an actress, wasn't she? _That_ guy ain't going to
cut no ice around here whatever."

"Looks an awful darn lot like Tom," ventured Chilly. "I dunno--you
take a Lorrigan--"

"Him? Lorrigan? Why, say! He may _look_ like a Lorrigan, but he ain't
one. Tom's damn right. He don't set in. Why, like as not he'd--"

"Aw, cut out the gabbling!" Ed's voice growled again. "It's yore play,
Bob."

Stepping softly, Lance went on to the house. "I just--_look_ like
one!" he repeated under his breath. "Fine! At any rate," he added
dryly, "I've proved that I _can_ go into the bunk house now and
then."

He went up and sang songs with Belle then, until after ten o'clock. He
would have sung longer, but it happened that in the middle of a
particularly pleasing "Ah-_ee_, oh-_ee_, hush-a-bye-_ba-by_"
yodel, Tom put his head out of the bedroom and implored Lance to
for-the-Lord-sake go up on the Ridge to howl. So Lance forbore to
finish the "ah-_ee_, oh-_ee_," much to Belle's disappointment.

"But you know Tom's been out riding hard and not getting much sleep,
so I guess maybe we better cut out the concert, honey," she told
Lance, getting up and laying her plump, brown arms across his
shoulders. "My heavens, Lance, you kinda make me think the clock's set
back thirty years, when I look at you. You're Tom, all over--and I did
think you were going to be like me."

Lance scowled just a little. "No, I'm not Tom all over--I'm Lance all
over."

"You're Lorrigan all over," Belle persisted. "And you're just like Tom
when he was your age. Good Lord, how time does slip away! Tom used to
be so full of fun and say such funny things--and now it's just ride
and ride and work, and eat and sleep. Honey, I want you to know that
I'm glad you learned something a little different. What's the use of
having a million, if you work yourself to death getting it? Look at
the boys--look at Al and Duke. They're like old men, the last year or
two. We used to have such good times on the ranch, but we don't any
more--nobody ever thinks of anything but work."

She lowered her voice to a whisper, her arms still lying on Lance's
shoulders, her clouded blue eyes looking up into his. "That trouble
with Scotty Douglas kind of--changed Tom and the boys. You went away.
You've changed too, but in a different way. It _soured_ them, just a
little. Tom wants to make his million quick and get outa here. I was
glad when you stirred things up a little, last spring, and gave that
dance. Or I was glad, till it ended up the way it did. It was the
first dance we'd been to since you left, Lance! And I thought it would
kind of patch up a little more friendliness with the folks around
here. But it didn't. It just made a lot of talk and trouble--and,
Lance, honey, I'm awfully darn sorry about that piano. It's down in
the chicken house this minute. Tom wouldn't even have it in the house.
And now, I don't suppose there ever will be any chance to make friends
with any one. Tom--well, all of us were so _darn_ mad to think she
never even asked us--"

"Don't care any more about that, Belle. Please don't. And by the way,
I took the money Mary Hope wanted to give dad for the schoolhouse.
Perhaps he didn't tell you, but he threatened to burn the house down
if she left the money, so I took it and gave her a bill of sale in his
name. I wish you'd keep the money. And some day, maybe dad will take
it."

"Tom never told me a word about it," Belle whispered pitifully,
dropping her forehead on Lance's broad chest. "Honey, it never used to
be this way. He used to tell me things. But now, he doesn't--much.
Last spring, when he built the schoolhouse and all, I was so _glad!_
It was more like old times, and I thought--but the fight turned him
and the boys again, and now they're just as far off as ever. Lance, I
don't whine. You never heard Belle whine in your life, did you, honey?
But I'll tell you this: The only things that haven't changed, on the
Devil's Tooth, are Riley and the pintos. And even they let you drive
'em to Jumpoff and back last spring without busting things up. They're
getting old, I guess. Maybe we're all getting old. Still, Rosa and
Subrosa are only ten past, and I haven't had a birthday for years--

"It's--Lance, do you mind if Belle lets go and tells you things, just
this once? You've changed, some, but not like the rest. Please, Lance,
I want to lean against you and--and feel how strong you are--"

A great tenderness, a great, overwhelming desire to comfort his
mother, who had never let him call her mother, seized Lance. His arms
closed around her and he backed to an armchair and sat down on it,
holding her close.

"Don't care, Belle--it's all right. It's _going_ to be all right. I'm
just Lance, but I'm a man--and men were made to take care of their
women. Talk to me--tell me what's been eating your heart out, lately.
It's in your eyes. I saw it when I came home last spring, and I see
it now every time I look at you."

"You've seen it, honey?" Belle's whisper was against his ear. She did
not look at his face. "There's nothing to see, but--one feels it.
Tom's good to me--but he isn't _close_ to me, any more. The boys are
good to me--but they're like strangers. They don't talk about things,
the way they used to do. They come and go."

Lance's big, well-kept hand went up to smooth her hair with a
comforting, caressing movement infinitely sweet to Belle. "I know," he
said quietly.

"And it isn't anything, of course. But the old boys have gone, and
these new ones--Lance, what is the matter with the Devil's Tooth
ranch? Tell me, for heaven's sake, if I'm getting to be an old woman
with notions!"

"You'll never be an old woman," said Lance in the tone Mary Hope built
her day-dreams around. "Age has nothing to do with you--you just
_are_. But as to notions--well, you may have. Women do have them, I
believe." He kissed her hair and added, "What do you think is the
matter with the ranch?"

"I don't _know_. When I try to pin it to one thing, there's nothing to
put a pin in. Not a thing. You remember Cheyenne? I was afraid Tom
would kill him, after the trial. You know it was practically proven
that he was a spy, and was working to get something on the outfit. I
was on the warpath myself, over that trial. I would a shot up a few in
that courtroom if Tom had been convicted. You know and I know that Tom
didn't have a thing to do with that darned, spotted yearling of
Scotty's.

"But Cheyenne just--just faded out of existence. Tom's never mentioned
him from the day of the trial to this. And I know he hates the whole
Rim, and won't have anything much to do with anybody--but he acts just
as if nothing had happened, as if nobody had ever tried to make him
out a cow thief. He won't talk about it. He won't talk about anything
much. When we're alone he just sits and _thinks_. And honey, the
Lorrigans have always been men that _did_ things.

"He and the boys woke up, and the ranch acted human about the
schoolhouse, but it's other times, when there's no excitement around,
that I feel as if--I don't know what. It's something underneath.
Something that never comes to the top. Something that's liable to
reach up and grab." She put a hand up and patted Lance's lean, hard
jaw. "I'd shoot any one that said Belle Lorrigan's _afraid_--but
that's about what it amounts to," she finished with a little mirthless
laugh.

"Belle Lorrigan's not afraid. There's nothing to be afraid of. You've
lived in the Rim too long, Belle, and you've been watching dad and the
boys chasing that million. I've seen other men working at it, and it
always gets hold of them until they don't seem to care for anything
else. Now, I know an ageless lady who's going to bed and forget all
about her nerves and her notions. Or if she doesn't forget, she'll
remember too that she has somebody around who knows--and who cares a
heap for his mother." Lance pulled her close and kissed her
comfortingly.

"That helps," whispered Belle. "You've changed, too--but not like the
rest, thank God. And I thought maybe you had noticed things--"

"I have noticed that the Devil's Tooth is mighty busy chasing dollars
on the hoof," soothed Lance. "It has left our Belle alone too much,
and it has gotten on her nerves. Go to bed, woman--and dream of
pleasant things."

He took her by the shoulders and pushed her playfully to the very door
of her bedroom, gave her another kiss and turned the knob for her, and
watched her go in with a smile on her face. His own smile lasted only
until the door was closed. He went to the lamp, blew it out and
entered his own room, removed his shoes and dropped them on the floor
with more noise than was considerate of his father's slumber, lighted
his lamp and moved aimlessly about the room for a time.

He sat down on the edge of the bed while he smoked a cigarette, his
elbows on his knees, his thoughts traveling far trails. Abruptly he
rose, put on a pair of well-worn tennis shoes, opened a door leading
outside and went quietly down to the corrals.

The first corral he crossed and found it empty of any horses save the
pintos and Coaley. The second corral held three horses, one of them
the chunky roan he had ridden that afternoon. The third and largest
corral was empty, the gate swinging open.

"All right--no horses caught up for night-riding--_yet_," he said to
himself, and returned to the house, leaving the straighter path to
pass close to the bunk house. He listened there for a full two
minutes, decided that it would take at least five men to do all of
that snoring, and went to bed thankful for the comfort of a felt
mattress under his tired body.

The next day passed without any incidents save trivial ones that did
not count. Lance rode to the creek with his trout-rod and reel--more
citified innovations which the ranch eyed askance--and spent four
hours loitering along the bank, his fly floating uselessly over
shallow pools where was never a fish. It was not the right time of day
for fishing, but Lance seemed to have forgotten the lore he had
learned along that same creek and others farther away.

Sometimes he could be seen from the ranch buildings, more often he
could not. When he could not be seen was when he was crouched among
the rocks, studying the Devil's Tooth Ridge with his powerful
glasses.

"Hope he's comfortable," he said once, when, satisfied that his guess
was correct, he put the glasses away and settled down seriously to
fishing.

He rode home with four trout, and Riley fried them for supper. During
supper Lance criticized Squaw Creek, and hinted that Mill Creek and
Lava Creek were better fishing waters, and that he meant to try them.

That night at eleven o'clock he made another silent tour of the
corrals and went to bed feeling pretty sure that the ranch would show
its present complement of men in the morning.

On the second day, four of the hired cowboys rode in at sundown, and
with them came Al. Their horses were fagged. They themselves were
dirty, hungry, tired. Their faces were glum--and the glumness remained
even after they had washed and eaten ravenously. Al did not come to
the house at all, but stayed down in the bunk house, whither Tom
presently went. Lance did not follow.

Belle looked worried and asked Lance constrainedly if he knew why Duke
had not come with the others. Lance laughed.

"Duke? Oh--he's on the trail of another dollar. By heck, Belle, I'm
afraid you've raised one son to be a shirk. I don't seem to need all
of that dollar chasing to make me happy."

Tom came in then, glanced swiftly from one to the other, said
something unimportant, rolled a cigarette with elaborate care, and
observed that Duke would find it hot, riding all the way to Shoshone,
and that he'd be darned if he'd go that far for any girl. He sat down
and disposed himself comfortably, got up, muttered something about
forgetting to turn Coaley out, and left the house.

Belle turned and looked at Lance. "Honey, it's that kind of thing--"

"I used to think, Belle, that you had the bluest eyes in the whole
world," Lance drawled quizzically. "They're blue enough, in all
conscience--by heck, Belle! Does a Lorrigan always love blue eyes?"

"I was going to say that--"

"You were going to say that you were not going to say a darned thing,
madam. You need a vacation, a trip somewhere. Why don't you beat it,
and get your nerves smoothed down a little?"

"Lance, you don't believe Duke--"

"Belle, your boys are old enough to think of girls a little bit, now
and then. Even your baby thinks of girls--a little bit. Now and then.
I'm going fishing, Belle. I'm going to fish where there are fish. And
if I'm not back by the clock, for heck's sake don't get yourself
excited and call _me_ a mystery."

She called after him. "Lance, come back here and tell me the truth!
You don't believe--"

"Belle, I'll tell you the truth. Sure, I'll tell you the truth. I tell
you to cut out this worrying over nothing. Why, don't you know the
world is plumb full of real things to worry about?" He came close,
patting her on the shoulder as one pats a child who feels abused for
slight cause. "This notion of yours--it's all damned nonsense. Cut it
out."

He went off whistling, and Belle gazed after him dubiously, yet
reassured in spite of herself. After all, there was nothing.




CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

WHEN A LORRIGAN LOVES


Followed a day of sweltering heat, when the horses in the corral
switched flies and sweated doing nothing; when all of the chickens
crawled under the coolest shelter they could find, and panted with
their wings spread away from their bodies; when the wind was like a
blast from an open furnace, and no man of his own choice remained in
the sun.

In the shade of the biggest haystack, Tom and Al squatted on their
boot heels with their faces toward the corral and the houses beyond,
and talked for two hours in low monotones while they broke spears of
fragrant hay into tiny bits and snapped the bits from them with thumb
and finger. From the house porch Lance saw them there and wondered
what they were talking about so long. He even meditated committing the
crime of eavesdropping, but he decided against it. Even if there had
been any point from which he could approach the two unseen, his soul
rebelled against such tactics employed in cold blood.

Devil's Tooth Ranch dragged somehow through its third day of inaction,
and that night prepared itself to sleep if possible, though the hot
wind still blew half a gale and the sky was too murky to show any
stars.

Daylight found Lance awake and brooding as he had done ever since his
return. He heard no sound in the house, and after a while he dressed
and went down to the bunk house. It was empty. No extra horses had
been corralled the night before, of that he was sure. Yet the boys
were gone again, and with them had gone Tom and Al. He looked and saw
Coaley in the box stall.

On this morning Lance asked no questions of Sam Pretty Cow or Shorty,
who presently appeared and went listlessly about their tasks. He
returned to the house, heard Riley grinding coffee, and dressed for
riding while he waited for breakfast. He was drinking his first cup of
coffee when Belle appeared in a thin blue kimono and a lacey breakfast
cap which Lance knew had been ordered from the big, dog-eared
catalogue on the living room table. He roused himself from scowling
meditation and gave her a smile.

"Sleep any?"

"Not much," sighed Belle. "Tom--" she stopped and looked at Lance
hesitatingly. "Tom had to push the cattle back from Lava Bed way--he
says this weather's drying up Lava Creek and the stock'll suffer if
they're left drifting up and down the mud-holes where they've watered
all summer. He took the boys and started about two in the morning--to
get out of the heat. I--I didn't think you'd want to go, honey--"

"You thought right. I didn't want to go; it's too hot," Lance assured
her, and refrained from looking at her face and the pathetic
cheerfulness she was trying so hard to make real.

"It's sultry. I thought yesterday I couldn't stand another hour of
that wind--but now I wish it would blow. It's going to storm--"

"Yes. It's going to storm." Lance set down his empty cup. "I may go
fishing, Belle. Don't look for me back--I may ride over and see how
the AJ is making out. The little Boyle girl is not married yet, I
hope?"

"Oh--no. No, she isn't. Lance, honey--"

Lance waited beside her chair, but Belle seemed to forget that she had
anything to say. She sat leaning her head on one hand, the other
stirring her coffee absent-mindedly. "Don't get caught out," she said
apathetically.

"I won't." Lance lifted the lace frill of the cap and kissed her
temple lightly. "Go back to bed. It's too early for you to be up."

At the stable Sam Pretty Cow looked a question, grunted and went on
with his stall cleaning. Lance saddled Coaley, tied on an emergency
ration of grub.

"Fishin's good t'day. Storm's coming. Uh-huh--you bet," Sam Pretty
Cow observed as Lance mounted.

"Maybe," Lance assented non-committally and rode away.

There were no horse tracks in the trail, yet Lance followed it
doggedly, the new-risen sun burning his back through two thin shirts.
He seemed in no doubt this morning as to the course he should take. He
scarcely gave a glance at the trail. His eyes were staring straight
before him at a sullen row of blue-black "thunder heads" that showed
above the gray skyline. Yet he did not see them, did not give a
thought to their meaning.

He was thinking poignantly of Mary Hope, fighting the vivid impression
which a dream last night had left with him. In his dream Mary Hope had
stood at her door, with her hands held out to him beseechingly, and
called and called: "Lance! Oh, Lance! I dinna hate you because you're
a Lorrigan--Oh, _Lance!_"

It had been a curious dream from start to finish. Curious because, in
various forms, this was the third time he had seen her stand with
hands outstretched, calling to him. He did not believe in dreams. He
had neither patience for presentiments nor faith in anything that
bordered on the occult.

It had been against much inner protest that he had ridden to the
schoolhouse in obedience to the persistent idea that she needed him.
That he had not found her there seemed to him conclusive proof that
there was nothing in telepathy. The dreams, he felt sure, were merely
a continuation of that persistent idea--and the persistent idea, he
was beginning to believe, was but a perverse twist given to his own
longing for her.

"--And I can't go to her--not yet. Not while the Lorrigan name--" What
came before, what came after those incomplete phrases he would not
permit his mind to formulate in words. But he could not shake off the
effect of the dream, could not stifle altogether the impulse that
plucked at his resolve.

For more than an hour he rode and tried to fix his mind upon the thing
he had set out to do. He knew perfectly well where he was going--and
it was _not_ to see Mary Hope. Neither was his destination Lava Creek
nor the drying range on either side. His first two days of hard riding
had been not altogether fruitless, and he had enough to think of
without thinking of Mary Hope. Certain cold facts stared at him, and
gibbered their sinister meaning, and dared him to ride on and discover
other facts, blood-brothers of these that haunted him o' nights.

Coaley, feeling his rider's mood, sensing also the portent of the
heavy, heat-saturated atmosphere and the rolling thunder heads, slowed
his springy trot to a walk and tossed his head uneasily from side to
side. Then, quite without warning, Lance wheeled the horse short
around and touched the reeking flanks with his heels.

"I'm seventeen kinds of a damn fool--but I can't stand any more of
this!" he muttered savagely, and rode at a sharp trot with his back to
the slow-gathering storm.

He found Mary Hope half a mile from the Douglas house, at the edge of
the meadow round which Hugh was driving a mower, the steady, metallic
clicking of the shuttle-like sickle sounding distinct from the farther
side of the motionless green expanse. Mary Hope was standing leaning
against one lone little poplar tree, her hat in her hand, and her eyes
staring dully into the world of sorrowful thoughts. Relief and a
great, hungry tenderness flooded the soul of Lance when he saw her. He
pulled up and swung off beside her.

"Girl--thank the good God you're all right," he said, and took her in
his arms, the veins on his temples beating full with his hot blood. "I
had to come. I had to see you. You've haunted me. Your voice has
called me--I was afraid--I had to come--and now I'm not going to let
you go. Oh, girl, you're mine! By all the powers of heaven and earth,
you're mine! The Lorrigan name--what does it matter? You're mine--I
love you. You'll love me. I'll _make_ you love me. You'll love me till
you won't care who I am or who you are, or whether there are any other
people in the world--you'll love me so! And I'll love you always,
always,--to death and beyond, and beyond what lies after that. Girl,
girl--you do need me! You need my love. You need it because it's the
biggest thing in the world--and your love is going to match it. We'll
get married--we'll make a world of our own, just you and I. We won't
care where we make it--it will be our world, the world of our love.
Are you game? Are you game to love Lance the way Lance loves you? Oh,
girl, tell me!"

A chill breath swept them like the memory of her father's hate. A
deep, basso rumble drowned whatever reply she stammered. He sheltered
her in his arms, kissed her lips, her eyes, her hair, went back to her
lips again.

"Oh, girl--when a Lorrigan loves--!" He cried softly, exultantly. "I
tried not to--but I had to love you. It's Fate. Are you afraid to love
me back? Are you afraid?"

"No Lorrigan can cry coward to a Douglas," Mary Hope panted. "But--but
my mother will be that--"

"My mother will be that--all of that, and more," Lance stopped her,
still exulting in her love. "All the Lorrigans--what does it matter?
Life's for you and me to live, you girl with the bluest eyes in the
world. When will you marry me? To-day? Tell me to-day!"

"Oh!" gasped Mary Hope, breathless still from the suddenness of it
all. "Oh, not to-day--oh, but the headlong way you have! I--I canna
think. I--"

"I don't want you to think. I didn't ask you to think. Just love
me--that's all. And marry me soon, Girl-with-the-blue-eyes. Soon. It
must be soon--sooner than to-morrow--"

Splittingly the thunder crashed close behind them, a vivid white line
cleaving sharply the snarling clouds. Like a sleeper Lance opened the
eyes he had closed against her hair and lifted his head. "I must take
you home," he said more calmly. "It's going to storm--hard. But let me
tell you, sweetheart,--it can't storm as hard as I can love. I'll take
you home, and then you'll marry me."

Mary Hope's face was pale and radiant. She did not say that she would
marry him--nor did she say that she would not. Her eyes were misty
with tears until she winked hard, when they shone softly. Lance had
never seen them so blue. She stood still, her hands clasped together
tightly while he gathered up the reins and mounted. He pulled his foot
from the left stirrup, reached down to her and smiled. Never had she
seen him smile like that. Never had she seen that look in his eyes.
She breathed deep, reached up and caught the saddle horn, put her foot
in the stirrup and let him lift her beside him.

Against Coaley's nervous pull at the bit Lance held a steadying hand
and laughed. "It's Fate, girl. Let the storm come. We'll beat it--it
can't hurt us. Nothing can hurt us now." He had to shout above the
crashing thunder. "Do you love me, sweetheart?" His eyes, close to her
own, flamed softly, making Mary Hope think dizzily of altar fires.

"I do--I do!" She gasped. "Oh, I cannot think how I love you--it
scares me to think!" Her arm was around his neck, her face was turned
to his.

He saw her lips form the words, guessed what it was she was saying.
The crash on crash of thunder beat the sound of her voice to
nothingness. The white glare of the lightning flashes blinded them.
Coaley, quivering, his nostrils belling until they showed all red
within, his big eyes staring, forged ahead, fighting the bit.

"He's rinning away wi' us!" shouted Lance, his lips close to her ear,
and laughed boyishly.

"Mother--" he heard her say, and pulled her higher in his arms, so
that he could be sure that she heard him.

"I'll just pick your little old mother up in my arms and make her love
me, too!" he cried. "Nothing can spoil our love--_nothing!_"

As though the gods themselves chided his temerity, the very heavens
split and shattered all sound with rending uproar. Coaley squatted,
stopped and stood shaking, his heart pounding so that Lance felt its
tremulous tattoo against his thigh. The rumbling after-note of the
thunder seemed like silence.

"It struck close. That shed--look!" Lance's voice was no longer the
voice of the young male whose love would override Fate itself. It was
the voice of the man who will meet emergencies quietly, unflinchingly,
and soothe the woman's fear. "Don't be afraid--it's all right,
sweetheart."

He forced Coaley to go on. He smiled at Mary Hope's pallor, he
reassured her as they neared her home. A shed, sufficiently detached
to keep its fire to itself, was blazing. The wind puffed suddenly from
nowhere and waved the high, yellow flames like torn ribbons. Great
globules of water splashed upon them from the pent torrent above.
Coaley galloped through the gate, passed the house, shied at something
lying on the ground, stopped abruptly when Lance pulled sharply on the
bit.

"Girl--sweetheart--_be game!_" Lance said sternly when Mary Hope
screamed.

He let her to the ground, swung off and passed her, running to the
pitifully still little figure of Mother Douglas lying in the pathway,
her checked apron flapping, its starchy stiffness showing limp dark
spots where the raindrops splashed.

"She's only shocked. She's all right--_stop that screaming!_ Good God,
girl, where's your nerve?"

His severity steadied her. Mary Hope stopped screaming, both hands
held tightly over her mouth. Lance was already on his way to the
house, carrying Mother Douglas like a sleeping child in his arms. And
the rain came, a white curtain of water that drenched them to the skin
in the first ten seconds.

On the bed where Aleck Douglas had stared at the ceiling, and raved,
and died, Lance laid her carefully as though he feared to waken her.
He tore open the faded calico dress at the throat, laid his ear upon
her heart.

"She's alive, sweetheart," he said hearteningly. "It's only a shock.
Bring a basin of water. We'll have her all right in no time."

He worked over the old woman, using all the means he could remember or
invent, while the house shook with the fury of the wind, and the
lightning dazzled them and the rain drummed incessantly on the roof.
Mary Hope watched him, her eyes wide, her lips refusing to form any
words. For her own sake he sent her on many little errands, kept her
busy at useless little tasks. After what seemed an interminable time
he stood looking down at the gently heaving breast.

"How game is my girl?" he asked, taking Mary Hope in his arms. "Is she
game enough to stay here while Lance goes for a doctor? It won't be
long--" He paused while he made a rapid mental calculation of the
distance, and of what a horse may endure. "Three hours. Will my girl
be brave enough to stay here three hours? I'll call the man who was
mowing--if I can find him. But that will take minutes. Three
hours--and you won't weaken, will you, dear?"

Mary Hope leaned against him, clutched him, shivered at the crashing
thunder. "It's awful," she moaned. "I'm afraid you might be hit--"

"Afraid? A Douglas not as game as a Lorrigan?" He shook her, lifted
his eyebrows at her, pursed his lips at her, shook her again and
kissed her. "I can't love a girl who's afraid of thunder. Your
mother's all right, you know. We saw where that bolt struck--fifty
yards, almost, from where she was. She got a shock, that's all. But
we'll have a doctor here and make him take the responsibility. And
I'll be back in three hours, and you're going to be game--just as game
as you've always been."

He pulled his hat down over his eyes, buttoned his wet coat to the
chin, laid his hand for a minute over the faintly pulsating heart of
Mother Douglas, swept Mary Hope up in his arms and kissed her again,
pulled open the door and was gone.

Through a rain-blurred window Mary Hope saw him run to the stable,
lead out Coaley who had taken refuge there, vault into the saddle
without troubling about the stirrup, and come thundering back past the
house and out of the gate, his head bent to the storm.

She looked at the clock. Three hours? He could never do it in three
hours! She went back and knelt beside the bed, and prayed as her
mother had taught her to pray. And not all of her petition was for her
mother. Every lightning flash, every crack, every distant boom of the
thunder made her cringe. Lance--Lance was out in the storm, at the
mercy of its terrible sword-thrusts that seemed to smite even the
innocent. Her mother--even her own mother, who had held unswervingly
to her faith--even she had been struck down!

A mile down the road Lance was leaning forward, encouraging Coaley to
more speed, because there the trail ran level and fairly free from
rocks. Later, he pulled the horse down to a walk, breathing him up a
hill; let him trot down the slope beyond, picked him into a swift
gallop when they again struck the level. He gauged, with coldblooded
attention to certain rough miles in the journey, just how swiftly
Coaley could cover ground and live. He knew horses. He knew Coaley,
and he knew that never yet had Coaley been pushed to the actual limit
of his endurance. But the girl Lance loved--ah, it was a Lorrigan who
loved!--was back there alone, and she would be counting the minutes.
It might be that he might return to find her weeping over her dead. So
Lance counted miles and a horse's strength, and bent to the storm and
rode.

Ten minutes past the hour, and he was snapping orders to the telegraph
operator. The storm, happily, had swept on down the canyon and had
given Jumpoff little more than a wetting and a few lightning flashes.

"And order out a special engine and coach,--what do I care what it
will cost? I'll pay. Wire your Lava chief that the money is here. Send
the doctor on ahead of the regular train--can't wait for that."

He had the Lorrigan habit of carrying a good deal of money on his
person, and he counted out banknotes until the operator lifted his
hand and said it was enough. He slammed out, then, mounted and rode to
a livery stable and gave orders there.

"--And I'll _buy_ the damn team, so kill 'em if you have to. Only get
the doctor out there." He was in the saddle and gone again before the
stableman had recovered from his sag-jawed astonishment.

"Guess there's something in that talk of him and the Douglas girl,"
the stableman gossiped to a friend while he harnessed his swiftest
team.

In ten minutes under the three hours Lance stopped at the house, went
in and saw that Mary Hope was still being game, and was very glad to
be in his arms, and that Mother Douglas was alive and staring up at
the ceiling, her face set in a deadly kind of calm.

"She moves her eyes to me, sometimes--she's been awake for almost an
hour. But she hasn't moved--" Her voice broke.

"It's all right--the doctor is on his way. And I'm here, sweetheart--you
won't be alone again. Where's that man of yours? I'll send him over
with a note to Belle. She'll come--she's a wonder with sick folks."

"Mother--I'm afraid mother wouldn't let her--she's that _set!_"

Lance looked at the corpse-like figure with the wide-open eyes and a
flicker of the lids now and then to show that she was alive, and
swallowed a lump in his throat. Mother Douglas would probably not know
who was with her, he thought.

Coaley, the proud-spirited, shambled slowly to the stable, his head
drooping, his eyes dulled with exhaustion. He had done his part. Lance
rubbed him down, blanketed him, working swiftly, his thoughts with
Mary Hope and her love and her fresh grief. He found Hugh, scribbled a
note to Belle and got him started on Jamie.

Mother Douglas moved her eyes, stared at him sharply when he went to
her. But she did not speak, did not move a muscle of her face. The
heart of Lance went heavy, but he could smile still at Mary Hope and
tell her that it was all right, and that the doctor ought to be there
in an hour or so, and that Belle would come, and that he loved her,
loved her, loved her.




CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE

BELLE LORRIGAN WINS


In the second-best suit of Aleck Douglas, with his wrists showing
strong and shapely below the coat sleeves, and wrinkles across his
back, Lance turned his own steaming apparel before the kitchen fire
and waited to hear what the doctor had to say.

In his mind was a great wonder at the inscrutable operations of Fate,
that had twice brought tragedy into the Douglas house while he himself
was permitted to bring all his love, which without the tragedies might
have been rejected; which had sent him hurrying to Mary Hope on this
day of all the days when he had longed to come. He could not believe
that blind Chance had irresponsibly twisted the threads of Mary Hope's
life so that these things had come upon her. He was abashed, humbled,
filled with awe of the tremendous forces that rule our destinies. For
perhaps the first time in his life he stood face to face with
something beyond his understanding, something against which his
arrogant young strength was powerless.

The doctor presently came to him, beckoned him to the doorway and
preceded him into the rain-washed yard, where the late afternoon sun
shone with dazzling brightness after the storm.

"I think she'll live through this," the doctor began abruptly. "It was
not the lightning, altogether, though she undoubtedly did receive a
severe shock. There has been a predisposition to paralysis, which is
the true nature of this attack. Her right side is completely
paralyzed, and so far as I can determine after a more-or-less
superficial examination, her vocal chords are also affected, making
speech impossible. Her left arm is not affected, and her mind seems
fairly normal. Too much work, too much worry, too much monotony--and
she has reached the time of life when these things are most apt to
occur. Her husband's death was undoubtedly a contributary cause. With
proper medical attention she may recover from this attack--partially,
at least. She should be removed to a good hospital, or a trained nurse
placed in charge of the case here. That will be expensive. Do you know
whether the family can afford--"

"The family can afford anything she needs, anything that will give her
a chance," Lance told him brusquely.

"She will probably be an invalid as long as she lives," the doctor
went on. "She will be a great care. Are there any relatives, other
than the girl? It's a tremendous burden to fall on her shoulders, Mr.
Lorrigan."

"The burden," said Lance, "will not fall on her shoulders. I don't
mind telling you that Miss Douglas and I will be married very soon. As
soon as possible."

The doctor brightened visibly. "Congratulations, Mr. Lorrigan! I
should strongly advise you, then, to have the old lady removed to a
nice, quiet hospital. You will not want the care of her--young people
should not be handicapped in that way. I can make the necessary
arrangements. She should not be subjected to the discomforts of the
journey just at present--it's a long way by team, and a long way by
train. I should like to have her as quiet as possible for a few days,
at least."

"We'll look after that," said Lance, and hurried in to tell Mary Hope
that her mother was not going to die, and that Belle was coming--he
could hear the rattle of the buckboard.

"I don't know what mother will say," Mary Hope began, and stopped and
hid her eyes behind her hands. Her mother, poor soul, could not say
anything. It seemed terrible to Mary Hope that her mother must lie
there and endure the presence of the painted Jezebel in her home, and
be unable to utter one word of denunciation, one bitter reproach. It
was like a judgment; and she could not bear the thought that her
mother must suffer it. A judgment, or treachery on her part,--the
terrible treason of a child betraying her mother.

"It's all right, girl; you don't _know_ our Belle. We'll just leave it
to her. She'll find a way. And I'll go out now and tell her all about
it, and leave her to manage."

"I'll go," Mary Hope decided unexpectedly. "I have things to say--you
shall not go, Lance Lorrigan. You will please let me see her
alone--first. I'm that afraid of Belle Lorrigan I could creep under
the table and hide! And so I shall go alone to her."

Lance surrendered, and rolled a cigarette and smoked it in the
kitchen, and wondered if a cigarette had ever been smoked in that
house before, and whether the ghost of Aleck Douglas was somewhere
near, struggling vainly against the inevitable. It certainly was
unbelievable that a Lorrigan should be there, master--in effect, at
least--of the Douglas household, wearing the shoddy garments of Aleck
Douglas, and finding them at least three sizes too small.

They were an unconscionably long time out there,--those two women who
meant so much to him. He glanced in at Mother Douglas, in bed now and
looking terribly shrunken and old. The doctor was with her, sitting
close to the bed and leaning forward a little, watching her eyes while
he talked soothingly. Lance was not wanted there, either. He returned
to the kitchen and put more wood in the stove, and felt tentatively
his drying clothes.

Belle came in, holding Mary Hope by the hand. The eyes of both were
moist, shining, blue as the sky outside.

"Lance, honey, I'm glad," she whispered, kissing him on the cheek.
"Hope told me. And don't you two kids worry about me. I'll win my way
somehow. I always have--and I guess maybe you've got it in you, too,
Lance. It sure took something more than Lorrigan nerve to win Mary
Hope--though I'll admit Lorrigan nerve won me. No, I won't go in there
now. Don't tell her I'm here, we'll wait awhile."

It was dusk, and the lamp had not yet been lighted. Through the
unshaded window Mother Douglas could look out at the first pale stars.
The doctor had gone. The house was very quiet, the snapping of the
kitchen fire, the steady _tick_-tock, _tick_-tock of the old-fashioned
clock blending with, rather than breaking, the silence.

Mother Douglas closed her eyes. Her groping left hand ceased its
aimless plucking at a yarn knot in the patchwork comforter. Her breath
came evenly--Mary Hope wondered if she slept. A hand fell on Mary
Hope's shoulder, though she had not heard a footfall. She seemed
prepared, seemed to know what she must do. She slipped out of the
chair, and Belle slipped into it. Mother Douglas opened her eyes,
turned them that way; infinite weariness marked the glance. Her left
hand resumed again its vague groping, the work-worn fingers plucking
at the coverlet.

Sitting there in the dusk, her fingers faintly outlined in the old
wooden armchair in which Aleck Douglas had been wont to sit and brood
somberly over his work and his wrongs, Belle began softly to sing:

    "Ye banks and braes o' bonnie Doon,
    How can ye bloom sae fresh and fair?"

The withered hand lay still, the fingers clutching tightly a fold of
cotton cloth. Mother Douglas looked and closed her eyes. Leaning
close, when the song was finished, Belle saw that the grim lips were
trembling, that tears were slipping down the too calm face. With her
handkerchief she wiped away the tears, and sang again. The "Girl with
a Thousand Songs" had many Scottish melodies in her repertoire, and
the years had not made her forget.

At the last, the groping left hand reached painfully across, found
Belle's hand waiting, and closed on it tightly. Whenever Belle stopped
singing the hand would clutch hers. When she began again the fingers
would relax a little. It was not much, but it was enough.

In the kitchen Mary Hope moved quietly about, cooking supper,
straining and putting away the milk Hugh brought in. In the kitchen
Lance sat and watched her, and made love to her with his big eyes,
with his voice that made of the most commonplace remark a caress.

But that night, when Mary Hope was asleep and Belle was dozing beside
the stricken woman, Lance saddled Jamie and led Coaley home. And while
he rode, black Trouble rode with him and Love could not smile and beat
back the spectre with his fists, but hid his face and whimpered, and
was afraid.

For Lance was face to face again with that sinister, unnamed Something
that hung over the Devil's Tooth ranch. He might forget it for a few
hours, engrossed with his love and in easing this new trouble that had
come to Mary Hope; he might forget, but that did not make his own
trouble any the less menacing, any the less real.

He could not tell her so, now while she had this fresh worry over her
mother, but Lance knew--and while he rode slowly he faced the
knowledge--that he could not marry Mary Hope while the cloud hung over
the Devil's Tooth. And that there was a cloud, a black, ominous cloud
from which the lightning might be expected to strike and blast the
Lorrigans, he could not deny. It was there. He knew it, knew just how
loud were its mutterings, knew that it was gathering swiftly, pushing
up over the horizon faster than did the storm of the morning.

He would not put Coaley down the Slide trail, but took him around by
the wagon road. They plodded along at a walk, Coaley's stiffened
muscles giving him the gait of an old horse. There had been no urgent
need to take Coaley home at once, but it was an excuse, and Lance used
it. He could not think,--he could not face his own trouble when he was
near Mary Hope. She drove everything else from his mind, and Lance
knew that some things must not be driven from his mind. He had set
himself to do certain things. Now, with Mary Hope loving him, there
was all the more reason why he should do them.

The ranch seemed deserted, though of course it was late and he knew
that every one would be in bed. He found a lantern, put Coaley into
the box stall again, and spent a long time rubbing him down and
carrying him fresh hay and water. He went up then and roused Sam
Pretty Cow, who was sleeping in the small cabin he had elected to make
his own private habitation on the ranch. Sam Pretty Cow told him that
no one had come home as yet.

"Two, three days, I dunno. Mebby Tom comes then," he hazarded,
blinking at Lance. "This too quick. Nobody comes back same day, you
bet."

Lance stood looking down at him, scowling thoughtfully. "Sam, you've
been a long time with the outfit. You've been a good man. You aren't
crippled up--and you're the best rider of the bunch of us. Why don't
_you_ go out any more?"

Sam lighted a cigarette, blew out the blazing match and laid the burnt
stub carefully on a box. He smoked stolidly, gazing at the dingy wall
before him.

"Bust them bronks in the corral," he said at last, grinning briefly.
"You stay long, you see me ride. Uh-huh--yo' bet."

"Well, yes. That's all right. But why don't you go with the outfit?"
Lance leaned against the wall, arms folded, studying him. It was
almost hopeless, trying to get anything out of Sam Pretty Cow; still,
Lance tried it.

Sam Pretty Cow looked up at him, looked down at his bare feet that he
had swung out of bed when Lance wakened him.

"Uh-huh. That's why. That all right, I'm go. That ain't all right, I'm
don' go. You bet."

Lance tap-tapped his right arm with the fingers of his left hand,
chewed his lip and looked at Sam Pretty Cow.

"Still, dad lets you stick around the outfit," he drawled meaningly.

Sam Pretty Cow shot a quick glance toward him, looked at the door,
relaxed again and studied his toes which he wriggled on the dirty
floor.

"I'm good man, you bet. I'm mind my business." He drew a long breath,
glanced again from the door to Lance's face. "Tom's damn smart
man--me, I'm mebby smarter. I dunno."

Lance looked down at him, smiling strangely. "Sam, I'm minding my
business, too. I'm doing it by--not minding my own business. Tom
Lorrigan's a smart man--but I'm Tom Lorrigan's son."

Sam turned his foot over, looked critically at the calloused sole of
it, turned it back again and blew a mouthful of smoke. "Yeah--uh-huh.
You damn smart--you don't like them damn jail. I'm don't. We both
smart, you bet."

Lance lifted an eyebrow. "What's the Piegan word for _accomplice_,
Sam?" he asked softly.

Sam Pretty Cow considered. "Me, I'm don' know them damn word," he
decided.

"It's a word that sends smart men to jail, Sam. It means the man that
stays at home and--_knows_."

Sam Pretty Cow tucked his feet under the thin blanket, laid his
half-smoked cigarette on the box, with the burning end out over the
edge.

"Uh-huh. Yeah. You bet." He looked up at Lance, for the first time
meeting his eyes squarely. "I'm know them damn word you call. Nh-hn.
Long time I'm got that what it mean on my heart. You're damn right."
He waited a minute, saw the Lorrigan look on Lance's face, on his lips
that smiled enigmatically. "Them Californy got bronks to bust?"

"Surest thing you know, Sam. But that's all right. You stay."

Sam Pretty Cow looked doubtful as an Indian may ever be expected to
look.

"You stay, Sam. There'll be bronks to bust on the Devil's Tooth for a
long while yet." He moved to the door, pulled it open and stood
looking out. Only a few miles away Mary Hope lay asleep, loving him in
her dreams, please God. Here, the Shadow hung black over the Devil's
Tooth. He turned to Sam Pretty Cow whose hand was stretched toward the
smoky lamp.

"You forget that word, Sam. It doesn't mean anything at all--to a
Piegan. And Sam, if I'm not around to-morrow morning, you ride over to
the Douglas ranch, and take back the horse I borrowed. Belle may want
to send you to town. She's there."

Sam Pretty Cow's eyes widened appreciably. "Uh-huh--all right. I'm
go," he promised, and blew out the light.

Lance went slowly up to the house and lay face downward on his bed.




CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

THE DOPE


Traveling lightly, Lance had covered a hundred and fifty miles in four
days, through country where trails were few and rough. He had made
wide detours, had slept on the ground in his slicker, had eaten bacon
and bannocks cooked in the small frying pan which he carried in the
sack with his meager rations. He had missed altogether the Devil's
Tooth outfit, and was swinging back now by way of the Lava Beds, where
Tom had said that they were going. It was because Tom had named that
as his destination that Lance had ridden elsewhere to find him; good
reasoning, but so far unproductive of results.

Four days, and he had not heard from Mary Hope, had learned nothing
conclusive, either for or against the Devil's Tooth. Some clues he had
gleaned, some evidence that strengthened his suspicions, but nothing
to make him feel that the trip had been worth the hardship.

Without knowing just why, he had ridden out expecting to learn the
best or the worst and have done with nagging suspicion. It had seemed
to him that Fate meant to be kind, that his destiny and Mary Hope's
pointed the way to happiness. Now he was beginning to doubt. How was
happiness possible, if the outlaw blood of the Lorrigans ran at high
pressure through the veins of his family? He did not know to a
certainty that it did, but until he knew that it did not he could
never marry Mary Hope. He had to know. It had been pure madness, going
to her as he had gone. While his horse plodded up the hill to where
the lava outcroppings began, Lance meditated gloomily on the madness
that had driven him to her. He had felt so sure of himself and his
future, so much the master of his destiny and hers! Yet, even while he
wooed her tempestuously he had known that it was madness, that Trouble
was reaching even then to pluck him by the sleeve. Mary Hope and her
stern, Scotch integrity linked to the blackened Lorrigan name that
might soon stand on the roster of the State's prison? It was
impossible, inconceivable. He had been a hound to say to her what he
had said.

True, when her mother was stricken he had been there to help her, to
comfort her. But it would be small comfort to Mary Hope when the storm
broke over the Devil's Tooth.

"And I said Fate was with us--I said nothing could hurt her! And it
will hurt her all her life."

His sweaty horse paused to breathe, heaving a great sigh, looking
discouragedly at the climb yet before him. Lance came to himself and
swung off, giving the horse an apologetic slap on the shoulder. "You
ought to kick me cold, Sorry, for making you pack my hulking carcase
up this hill. Why didn't you stop at the bottom?"

Sorry looked at him, waited for Lance to take the lead, and climbed
after him more briskly. He was a big-boned, well-muscled animal, but
two hundred pounds had been a heavy load to carry up hill, and he was
glad to be rid of it.

At the top Lance did not remount. The thickly strewn flat rocks made
treacherous footing, and more than one man had taken a nasty fall
because he had chosen to ride that mile of lava when he should have
walked. It was somewhere along this stretch of rock outcropping that
Shorty had broken his knee so that he would never ride again to the
round-up.

Lance was walking along with his head down, brooding over his trouble,
when he fancied he heard a faint halloo. Sorry stopped and craned his
head. But Lance could see nothing save the barren stretch of lava and
the monotonous wilderness beyond, with mountains in the far background
and the Black Rim stretching grim on the left of him. He started on,
thinking that perhaps some animal or bird was responsible for the
sound. But he had gone but a short distance when it came again, more
distinctly because he was half listening for it.

He waited, made a guess at the location of the person who shouted, and
turned that way, changing the reins from his right hand to his left
and pulling his holstered six-shooter within easy reach of his hand.
This was not the country, his was not the errand, for carelessness,
and Lance was taking no risk.

As he walked his eyes roved continually over the brown expanse of
rocks and stunted juniper that formed the Lava Beds. Behind him came
Sorry, his worn shoes slipping now and then on a smooth rock, his head
bobbing patiently, close to Lance's shoulder. As so often happens, it
was the horse that first discovered the object of their search. He
pulled away from the direct line, looking and looking at what Lance,
keen-eyed though he was, mistook for a black rock with a juniper bush
growing beside it.

Lance turned that way, focussed his glasses upon the object and saw
what had happened. A horse had fallen with its rider, the two lying
together, the man pinned under the horse. A black horse which he
recognized, and a big, red-faced cowpuncher with gray eyes that did
not twinkle. While Lance looked, the man lifted his head, seemed to be
staring straight into Lance's face, opened his mouth and contorted his
pain-racked face in a shout. It was strange to have the sound reach
Lance's ears thinned and weakened by distance, while the glasses
brought the injured man so close that he could see the wild look of
entreaty in his eyes. Lance put up the glasses and began running, with
Sorry stumbling and slipping behind him.

"I been here since morning," the big cowpuncher chattered feverishly
when Lance came up to him. "I'm fixed, all right! I was dozing and I
didn't jump and he caught me when he fell. I guess his leg is broke,
but so is mine, fur's that goes. I come down hard on a rock and I
guess I broke some ribs or something. Hurt like hell for a few
hours--it ain't so bad now. Look out when you go to make him git
up--if he rolls on me it's all off. I guess it's all off, anyway, but
I don't want to be squashed to death."

Lance bit his lip. It was hard to hear the man talking, talking, in
that rapid, headlong fashion, while his leg lay under the full weight
of the black horse and the sun blazed on his uncovered head. It was
hard to see his shirt all blood-soaked on the left side where he had
fallen across an uptilted, thin-edged rock.

The horse, too, was in sorry state. A weed-grown crevice had cheated
him with its semblance to sound footing, and he lay with front leg
broken, groaning a little now and then while the man talked and
talked. And while he examined the two it seemed to Lance that Fate was
pointing, and saying that here, too, was one of the inscrutable
instruments by which he worked out the destinies of men. A slippery
rock, a man riding that way half asleep--

"I'll have to shoot this horse, I'm afraid," Lance said pityingly.
"His leg is broken--it's the most merciful thing I can do. And if I
try to lift him off you while he's alive he may struggle--"

"Sure thing! Go on and shoot him! I woulda done it myself if you
hadn't come along purty soon. I knowed it would be all off with us
both if we had to lay out all night, so I was going to finish us both
off, when I seen you. Thought I'd take a gambling chance till
dark--but the sun has been baking me to a crisp--"

"It's all right--I'll get you to a ranch. We'll fix you up, so don't
think about the finish." A little of the color had left Lance's face.
Shooting a horse was to him next thing to shooting a human. He had to
do it, though. There was no other way.

He took the horse by the cheek-piece of the bridle, spoke to him
gently, turned the head a little away from him so that the horse could
not look him in the eyes. "Poor old fellow, it's all I can do for
you," he muttered when he pulled his gun from the holster.

"Maybe you better do the same for me," said the man, still speaking in
the rapid tone which told of fever. "You ain't able to heave him off
me, are you?"

"Sure, I'm able to. Lie still, now, and grit your teeth, old man. It
may hurt, when I lift him off your leg. I'll raise him up and put a
rock under, and pull you out. Can you stand that?"

"Me? Hell, yes. Ain't I been standing pain since before daylight? Me,
I can stand anything if I have to!"

Yet he fainted when Lance took him by the shoulders and pulled him
free, and Lance used half the water in the canteen on the saddle in
bringing him back to consciousness. When the fellow opened his eyes,
Lance remembered that he had half a pint of whisky in his coat pocket,
and offered it to the injured one.

"Golly, that's a life-saver!" he ejaculated when he had taken two
swallows. He reached down and felt his crushed leg, grimacing at the
pain of returning circulation.

"She's busted all right. Busted _right_, if I'm any judge. And my
side--things are all busted up in there. I know it. Say, oldtimer, how
do you figure you're going to get me outa here? Do you know it's all
of ten miles to the nearest ranch? I've got a map of the whole country
in my coat pocket. I'll show yuh if you don't know. You're a stranger,
I guess. I don't recollect seeing yore horse before. I always know
horses. What's his brand?"

Lance did not say. He himself was wondering how he was going to get
the man out of there. If the fellow thought he was a stranger, all
the better. Still, it did not matter much. Already the whisky was
whipping the man's brain to quicker action, loosening his tongue that
had already been set wagging by fever.

"Think you can stand it to ride?" he asked solicitously. "I can heave
you into the saddle, if you can stand being moved. I'd ride to the
next ranch and bring a wagon--but the country's too rough. A rig
couldn't get within five miles of here."

"You're right. Not even Belle Lorrigan's buckboard could make it
across that canyon on beyond. Say, speaking of the Lorrigans--" he
hesitated, then plunged recklessly on. "I'm going to pass you some
dope I've got on that outfit. The chances are I'm done for. The way my
insides feel--and you do something for me, will you? If I cash in, you
turn in this dope. We may as well 'tend to this business right now,
before I tackle the job of riding."

Lance stood looking down at him while he fumbled in his pocket, pulled
out a small leather notebook and some papers.

"I'm a stock detective, see. My name's Burt Brownlee. I was just about
ready to turn in the dope and have the whole outfit pulled. Well, it's
all here. They been rustling right and left, see. But they're
cute--they're _damn_ cute. We been trying to work up the case on the
outside, and it seemed like somebody in the Black Rim was sending
stock out, and so I've been working on this end. Now here's the data.
I followed 'em, and I've got the dope. I know now how they work it,
and my evidence and this dope here, that can be verified later on when
the time comes, will put the whole bunch over the road, see. They're
outlaws--always have been--but they won't be by the time they get outa
the pen."

"You better keep that," Lance cut in gruffly. "Man, that's nothing you
want to be gabbling to a stranger. Shut up, and let me put you on my
horse."

"No, I want to tell yuh," Burt insisted with all the obstinacy of a
man half crazy with pain and whisky. "I want to tell yuh, and I'm
going to tell yuh! Get down here and listen. Here's a map, and here's
the brands they worked, and here's how they worked 'em. And here's the
dates."

On one knee Lance kneeled and listened, his jaws set hard together.
Fast as the man talked the thoughts of Lance flew ahead, snatched at
the significance of every detail, every bit of evidence. Some things
puzzled Burt Brownlee, but Lance knew the answer to the puzzle while
Burt talked and talked. Finally he laid his hand over the finely
traced maps that showed secret trails, unguessed, hidden little draws
where stolen stock had been concealed, all the fine threads that would
weave the net close around the Lorrigans.

"Here, put that stuff up. This is not getting you to a doctor, and
this can wait. Put it up."

"No, you take it. And if I don't pull through, you turn it in. You
keep it. I don't want to be found dead with that dope on _me_--you
can't tell who might get hold of it." He thrust the papers and the
book eagerly into Lance's unwilling hand.

"No-o, you can't tell who might get hold of it," Lance admitted,
biting his lip. "Well, let me take your riding outfit off this horse
and then we'll go."

While he pulled saddle and bridle off the dead horse, Burt Brownlee
talked and talked and talked. He wanted more whisky, which Lance
promised him he should have when he was ready to get on the horse. He
told further evidence against the Devil's Tooth, told how he had
followed Tom for two days only to see him later at the ranch where he
had returned while Burt had for a time lost the trail. On that trip,
he said, he would have gotten the full details of one "job" had he not
turned off to follow Tom Lorrigan.

While he worked Lance listened stoically. When he was ready to start
he led Sorry close, lifted the fellow as tenderly as he could, saw him
faint again with the pain, and somehow got him on the horse while he
was still unconscious. Burt Brownlee was a big man, but he was not of
great weight. Lance bound him to the saddle with his own riata,
revived him with a little more whisky, and started for Conley's, who
lived nearest.

It was ten miles to Conleys, as riders guessed the distance. Lance
walked and led Sorry, and tried to hold Burt Brownlee in the saddle,
and listened to his rambling talk, and gave him more whisky when he
seemed ready to die. During certain intervals when Burt seemed lucid
enough to realize his desperate condition, Lance heartened him with
assurance that they were almost there.

On the way into the canyon Burt Brownlee suffered greatly on the steep
trail, down which the horse must go with forward joltings that racked
terribly the man's crushed side. The whisky was gone; he had finished
the scanty supply at the canyon's crest, because he begged for it so
hard that Lance could not steel himself to refuse. At the bottom Lance
stopped Sorry, and put an arm around Burt. Lance's face was set
masklike in its forced calm, but his voice was very tender, with the
deep, vibrant note Mary Hope loved so ardently.

"Lean against me, old man, and rest a minute. It's pretty tough going,
but you're game. You're dead game. You'll make it. Wait. I'll stand on
this rock--now lean hard, and rest. Ho, there's no whisky--water will
have to do you, now. I've a little in my canteen, and when you've
rested--"

"I'm going," said Burt, lurching against Lance's steady strength.
"You're a white man. That Lorrigan dope--don't forget what I told
you--turn it in--"

Lance's mouth twisted with sudden bitterness. "I won't--forget," he
said. "I'll turn it--in."

"I'm--a goner. Just--stand and let me--lean--"

Lance stood, and let him lean, and with his handkerchief he very
gently dried Burt's cold, perspiring face. It seemed an endless time
that he stood there. Now and then Burt clutched him with fingers that
gripped his shoulders painfully, but Lance never moved. Once, when
Sorry turned his head and looked back inquiringly, wondering why they
did not go on, Lance spoke to the horse and his voice was calm and
soothing. But when it was all over, Lance's underlip was bleeding at
the corner where he had bitten into it.

He walked into Conley's yard an hour after that, his face drearily
impassive, a dead man lashed to the saddle. He asked for paper and a
pen, and in a firm, even handwriting he described tersely the manner
of Burt Brownlee's death, told where the dead horse and the saddle
would be found, and as an afterthought, lest there be trouble in
locating the spot, he drew a sketch of that particular part of the
Lava Beds. He signed the statement, and had the excited Conleys,
shaking man and half hysterical wife, sign also as witnesses. His
matter-of-fact treatment of the affair impressed them to the point of
receiving his instructions as though they were commands which must on
no account be disobeyed in any particular.

"I'll be back and tell the coroner. He'll want to see the horse and
saddle, perhaps. Mr. Conley, you can find them without any trouble. If
he wants an inquest, tell him I'll be on hand. Thank you, Mrs.
Conley,--no, I'll not wait for anything to eat. I'm not hungry. I must
get home. Good-by--sorry I can't do any more for you."

He mounted Sorry, pricked him into a gallop, and presently disappeared
around a bend of the trail that led in the direction of the Devil's
Tooth ranch.




CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

HOW ONE TRAIL ENDED


Darkness falls late on the Black Rim country in midsummer. It was just
deepening from dusk when Lance rode up to the corral gate, pulled the
saddle and bridle off Sorry with swift jerks that bespoke a haste born
of high nervous tension, and strode up to the house. From the bunk
house, when he passed, came the murmur of low-keyed voices. The
outfit, then, was at home once more. From the shaded window of Belle's
bedroom a thin silver of light shone, where the blind was curled back
at the edge, but the rest of the house was dark. He went in, moving
softly, but Belle must have heard his step on the porch, for she came
out with her bedroom lamp in her hand, the other raised to impress
quiet upon him.

"Lance, honey! Where on earth have you been?" She set the lamp down on
the table and came close, putting her arms around him, her eyes
searching the impenetrable calm of his face, the veiled purpose behind
his eyes. It was the Lorrigan fighting look; she had seen it once or
twice in Tom's face and it had frightened her. She was frightened
now, but her own intrepid soul pushed back her fear.

"_Sh-sh_, honey," she whispered, though Lance had neither moved nor
spoken since she touched him. "_Sh-sh_--Mary Hope and her mother are
here, and they're both asleep. I--honey, we were so worried, when you
didn't come back. That note you sent didn't say a _thing_, and I was
afraid--And I was between the devil and the deep sea, honey. I
couldn't stay away from here, when I didn't know--and I couldn't leave
Hope there, and the women that came flocking when they heard the news
were just _cows_ for brains. And the old lady won't have a nurse and
she _wouldn't_ let me out of her sight--she keeps me singing about all
the time she's awake, or reciting poetry--Bobbie Burns, mostly, and
Scott. Would you ever _think_ she'd stand for Bobbie Burns? But I can
do it as Scotch as she can, and she likes it.

"So she wouldn't let me leave, and I couldn't stay--and I had Hugh
make up a bed in the spring wagon, and brought her over here. If you
and Hope are going to be married right away, the old lady will need to
be here, anyway. The doctor tried to talk hospital--he just _tried_.
The old lady can write now with her left hand so we can make it out,
and when he said hospital to her she--she almost swore.

"So it's all right, Lance, honey--my God, Lance, _what is it_? Have
you heard from Duke?" She broke down suddenly, and clutched him in a
way that reminded him poignantly of that dying man in the canyon. Her
whisper became sibilant, terrified. "_What is it?_ What has happened?
Lance, _tell_ me! Tom is here, and Al; they were here when we came,
to-day--"

Lance took a deep breath. Very gently he leaned and kissed her on the
forehead, reached back and pulled her hands away from his shoulders.

"It's nothing, Belle. I'm--tired. And you--you surprised me. Will it
waken them if I--clean up a little before I go to bed? I'll--be
careful." He forced his eyes, his lips, to smile at her. "Good girl,
Belle. I'm--you're a trump. Now go back to bed. Lance is on the
job--Lance won't leave again like that--he'll--settle down."

He sat down on the nearest chair and pulled off his boots. He made an
imperative gesture toward her bedroom, and Belle, giving him a
strange, searching look, went in and closed the door after her. He
gave a sigh of relief when she was gone, never dreaming how little he
had imposed upon her.

In his stocking feet he went to the kitchen, found hot water in the
teakettle, carried it to his room and shaved, cleansing his body
as well as he could from the dust of the trip without making any
sound that might disturb the sleeping invalid and Mary Hope. He
dressed himself carefully as though he were going to meet guests.
The set look was still in his face when he stood before the dresser
mirror, knotting the blue tie that harmonized best with the shirt he
wore. He pulled the tan leather belt straight, so that the plain
silver buckle was in the middle, took something off the bed and pushed
it carefully inside the waistband of his trousers, on the left side,
taking great care that its position was right to the fraction of an
inch. He took his tan Oxford shoes in his hand, pulled open his door
as quietly as any burglar could have done, stepped down upon the
ground and put on the shoes, lacing them carefully, tucking in the bow
ends fastidiously.

Then, moving very softly, he went down the path to the bunk-house,
opened the door and walked in, never dreaming that Belle was no more
than a dozen steps behind him, or that, when he closed the door, she
was standing just outside, listening.

The blood of his actress mother carried him insouciantly over the
pregnant silence that received him. He leaned negligently against the
wall beside the closed door, his arms folded, his eyebrows tilted
upward at the inner ends, his lips smiling quizzically.

"I've another funny story to tell you fellows," he drawled, just
before the silence became awkward. "Glad you're all here--it's too
good to keep, too good to waste on part of the outfit. I want you all
to get the kick. You'll enjoy it--being cattlemen. It's a joke that
was pulled on an outfit down in Arizona."

Like a trained monologist, he had them listening, deceived by his
smiling ease, waiting to hear the joke on the Arizona outfit. Tom and
Al, at the table with some papers before them, papers that held
figures and scribbled names, he quite overlooked. But they, too,
listened to the story, were imposed upon by that quizzical smile, by
his mimicry, by the bold, swift strokes with which he painted word
pictures which their imaginations seized upon as fast as they were
made.

It was Tom who first felt a suspicion of Lance's purpose, and shifted
his position a little, so that his right hand would be free. As he did
so, without looking toward him Lance's left fingers began tapping,
tapping the muscles of his right arm; his right hand had sagged a
little. Tom's eyebrows pulled together. Quite well he knew that pose.
He waited, listened with closer attention to the story.

Lance paused, as your skillful _raconteur_ usually does pause before
the climax. His glance went impersonally over the faces of his
audience. Most of them were leaning forward, a few were breathing
hard. They were listening, straining unconsciously to get the meaning
he withheld from them. Lance's right hand sagged another half inch,
his lips pulled sidewise in the enigmatical smile of the Lorrigans.

"I lied, of course--about the outfit this joke is on. It's really the
Devil's Tooth I'm talking about. But the kick remains, so listen,
folks, just listen.

"I'm a Lorrigan. Two of you are Lorrigans, and you know what I mean
when I say that. The rest of you had better _guess_ what I mean, if
you don't know--and guess right!

"I'm talking to you with my back against the wall--in more ways than
one. Don't think I'm fool enough not to know it. But you're listening
with your backs against another wall; I believe it is of stone,
usually, and the windows have bars. I don't think you're such fools
you fail to grasp my meaning. I'm talking--and you're going to
listen.

"What I said--well, I have the dope, you know. I know where you took
that last bunch of stolen horses, and I know the date when you turned
them over. I have a map or two--I know those secret trails you made,
that lead into that hidden little basin that the Rim has not
discovered yet. I've dope enough to indict the whole outfit on five
separate counts--and any one of them will put every man of you in the
pen for a term of years--well, from five to ten up to fifteen or
twenty--a mere detail.

"I know why Duke didn't come back. There's a yellow streak in Duke,
and he lost his nerve and drifted to parts unknown. Where, I'm not
curious to discover. It doesn't matter, so long as his destination
_remains_ unknown.

"That's the story. And now, here's the point: Others, detectives
working at the other end of the business, have an inkling of some of
this dope. They haven't got what I've got, but they may possibly get
it. They may--possibly. And if they do--wel-ll--" He smiled at them,
his eyebrows pointing his meaning, his fingers tapping, tapping on his
arm.

"You've got to quit. Now, without turning the deal you're working on,
you've got to quit. Get that. Get it right into your souls. You men
that have been hired to steal, you've got to drift. Where, does not
concern me at all. Where Duke went is good--Parts Unknown. Or if it's
to hell--why, the going is good. Never better. You'll go quicker, but
there won't be any coming back, so I advise--Parts Unknown.

"You two Lorrigans--I'm not thinking of you now as my brother and my
father--the same advice applies to you. You're Lorrigans. You'd rather
fight it out than pull out, but you won't. You'd rather kill me than
go. That's all right; I understand perfectly. But--I'm Lorrigan, too.
You'll go, or I'll kill you. Tom Lorrigan, your hand is pret-ty close
to your gun! But so is mine. You'd kill me, because I stand in the
trail you've been traveling. But you wouldn't kill me a damn bit
quicker than I'd kill _you_! I do stand in the trail--and you're
going to take another, both you Lorrigans.

"You had a debt--a bill of damages against the Black Rim. Wel-ll," he
smiled, "you've collected. Now, to-night, you write 'paid' across that
bill. You tried to be honest, and the Black Rim wouldn't give you
credit for it; they tried to frame something on you, tried to send you
'over the road' on a damned, measly charge you weren't small enough to
be guilty of. I understand. The trail ends right here. You quit. You
sit there ready to kill. But I'm just as ready as you are. You'll
quit, or _I'll kill you_!"

He waited, watching Tom. Tom, watching Lance, got up and faced him
cold-eyed, unafraid, weighing not chances, but values rather.

"You'd kill me, would you!" he asked, his voice matching the drawl of
Lance.

"Sure, I'd kill you!" Lance smiled back.

Eyes on a level, the two stared at each other, smiling that deadly,
Lorrigan smile, the smile of old Tom Lorrigan the killer.

"You would, all right," Tom said. Then his stiffened muscles relaxed.
A twinkle came into his eyes. "If you're game enough to do that, kid,
by God, I'm game enough to quit!"

Lance unfolded his arms, reached out with his open right hand and met
Tom's hand in a close grip. "That's the stuff, dad! I knew you had it
in you--I knew it!"

Outside the door, Belle hugged her six-shooter to her breast and
leaned against the wall, her knees shaking under her. "Thank God! Oh,
thank God a Lorrigan can be bigger than all the Lorrigan blood that's
in him!" she whispered. "Oh, Lance, honey--oh, thank God!"




CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT

THE MAKING OF NEW TRAILS


At the corral, that time-honored conference ground of all true range
men, the three Lorrigans leaned their backs against the rails and
talked things over in true range style: laconic phrases that stated
their meaning without frills or mental reservations, and silences that
carried their thoughts forward to the next utterance.

"Al can take the outfit and drift," said Tom, as though he were
discussing some detail of the round-up. "He knows where--and they can
scatter, I'll give 'em a horse apiece as a--a kinda bonus. I'll have
to stay, looks like. Fall round-up's coming on."

"Wel-ll," said Lance, throwing an arm over a rail and drumming with
his fingers, "I was raised on round-ups. I don't suppose I've
forgotten all about it. You might turn the management over to me for a
year or so, and take a trip. Belle needs it, dad. I think I could keep
things riding along, all right."

"Sounds kinda like you had that idea for a joker up your sleeve," Al
observed meaningly. "Are you plumb sure of that dope, Lance?"

Lance removed his arm from the corral rail, and reached into his
pocket. "I didn't think you had it in you, Al, to be that big a fool.
But since you've said it, here's the dope. Take it, dad. I said I'd
turn it in, but I didn't say who'd receive it. The stock detective
that's been camping on your trail for the last few weeks was killed on
the Lava Beds to-day. I found him. He's at Conley's, now, waiting for
the coroner. You might ride over, Al, and see for yourself. And on the
way, you might ride up the Slide trail and take a look around the
Tooth. You'll see signs where he's watched the ranch from up there.
And you can go on down and find where he camped several times at
Cottonwood Spring.

"The coroner won't get on the job before to-morrow or next day, and it
will take a little time, I suppose, for Brownlee's employers to wake
up and wonder what became of the evidence he was sent to collect.
You'll have, perhaps, a week in which to make your getaway. They're
waiting outside the Rim for the evidence this Burt Brownlee was
collecting, so that they could make one big clean-up.

"I'm not setting myself up as a judge, or anything like that--but--well,
the going's good, right now. It may not be so good if you wait."

He lighted a match and held it up so that Tom could glance at the
maps and skim the contents of the memorandum book. By the blaze of the
match Lance's face still looked rather hard, determined to see the
thing through.

"You'd better burn that stuff, dad. And in the morning--how would
it be if we went to town and got the legal end of my new job
straightened out! I'll want a Power of Attorney. You may be gone
for some time. I suppose you know," he added, "that Mary Hope and
I are going to be married. So you and Belle can take a trip
somewhere. They say it's worth while going down to the big cattle
country in the Argentine--South America, you know."

Tom did not reply. He had lighted a second match and was studying
attentively the data in Burt Brownlee's book. The third match told him
enough to convince him. He gave a snort when darkness enveloped them
again.

"I sharpened my pencil pretty darn fine when I made out my bill
against the Black Rim a few years ago--and by the humpin' hyenas,
these figures here kinda go to show I overcharged 'em. Some. Not so
damn much, either, if you look at my side. Better get up the horses,
Al, and you'n the boys take the trail. The kid's right. The goin's
dern good, right now. Better'n what it will be."

In the scuffed sand before the corral gate Tom made a small fire, with
a few crumpled papers and one small book, which he tore apart and
fed, leaf by leaf, to the flames. The light showed him grimly smiling,
when he tilted his head and looked up at Lance who watched him.

"So you'n the Douglas kid is figuring on getting hitched! Well, don't
ever try to eye her down like you done to yore dad. She'll brain yuh,
likely--if you wait long enough for her to make up her mind."

Lance laughed. Up at the house Belle heard him and caught her breath.
She stared hard at the three forms silhouetted like Rembrandt figures
around the little fire, started toward them and stopped. She was a
wise woman, was Belle. Some things a woman may know--and hide the
knowledge deep in her heart, and in the hiding help her mate.

Black Rim folk, who always knew so much of their neighbors' affairs,
once more talked and chortled and surmised, and never came within a
mile of the truth. The young college rooster had come home to the
Devil's Tooth, they gossiped, and had a row with Al; so Al left home,
and Duke too. The Lorrigans always had been hard to get along with,
but that Lance--he sure must be a caution to cats, the way he'd
cleaned off the ranch.

Marrying the Douglas girl, and taking that paralyzed old lady right to
the ranch, had probably had a lot to do with it. Lance might be
willing to forget that old trouble with Scotty, but the rest of the
Lorrigans sure never would. And it was queer, too, how all that
rustling talk petered out. Mebby there hadn't been much in it, after
all.

Not even Mary Hope guessed why she and Lance were left so completely
in charge of the ranch. Sometimes, when the invalid was captious and
showed too plainly that she preferred Belle's playing and singing to
the musical efforts of her own daughter, and scrawled impatient
questions about Belle's return, Mary Hope would wonder if Tom Lorrigan
really hated her, and if her coming had practically driven him out of
his own home. She would cry a little, then,--unless Lance happened to
be somewhere near. If he were, there was no crying for Mary Hope.

"He's a good son," Mother Douglas once wrote, "I wish Aleck was alive,
to see how the Lord has changed the Lorrigans."

THE END




THE NOVELS OF MARY ROBERTS RINEHART

May be had wherever books are sold. Ask for Grosset & Dunlap's list.

DANGEROUS DAYS.

A brilliant story of married life. A romance of fine purpose and
stirring appeal.

THE AMAZING INTERLUDE.

Illustrations by The Kinneys.

The story of a great love which cannot be pictured--an interlude--amazing,
romantic.

LOVE STORIES.

This book is exactly what its title indicates, a collection of love
affairs--sparkling with humor, tenderness and sweetness.

"K." Illustrated.

K. LeMoyne, famous surgeon, goes to live in a little town where
beautiful Sidney Page lives. She is in training to become a nurse. The
joys and troubles of their young love are told with keen and
sympathetic appreciation.

THE MAN IN LOWER TEN.

Illustrated by Howard Chandler Christy.

An absorbing detective story woven around the mysterious death of the
"Man in Lower Ten."

WHEN A MAN MARRIES.

Illustrated by Harrison Fisher and Mayo Bunker.

A young artist, whose wife had recently divorced him, finds that his
aunt is soon to visit him. The aunt, who contributes to the family
income, knows nothing of the domestic upheaval. How the young man met
the situation is entertainingly told.

THE CIRCULAR STAIRCASE. Illustrated by Lester Ralph.

The occupants of "Sunnyside" find the dead body of Arnold Armstrong on
the circular staircase. Following the murder a bank failure is
announced. Around these two events is woven a plot of absorbing
interest.

THE STREET OF SEVEN STARS. (Photoplay Edition.)

Harmony Wells, studying in Vienna to be a great violinist, suddenly
realizes that her money is almost gone. She meets a young ambitious
doctor who offers her chivalry and sympathy, and together with
world-worn Dr. Anna and Jimmie, the waif, they share their love and
slender means.

Grosset & Dunlap, Publishers, New York




BOOTH TARKINGTON'S NOVELS

May be had wherever books are sold. Ask for Grosset & Dunlap's list.

SEVENTEEN. Illustrated by Arthur William Brown.

No one but the creator of Penrod could have portrayed the immortal
young people of this story. Its humor is irresistible and reminiscent
of the time when the reader was Seventeen.

PENROD. Illustrated by Gordon Grant.

This is a picture of a boy's heart, full of the lovable, humorous,
tragic things which are locked secrets to most older folks. It is a
finished, exquisite work.

PENROD AND SAM. Illustrated by Worth Brehm.

Like "Penrod" and "Seventeen," this book contains Borne remarkable
phases of real boyhood and some of the best stories of juvenile
prankishness that have ever been written.

THE TURMOIL. Illustrated by C. E. Chambers.

Bibbs Sheridan is a dreamy, imaginative youth, who revolts against his
father's plans for him to be a servitor of big business. The love of a
fine girl turns Bibb's life from failure to success.

THE GENTLEMAN FROM INDIANA. Frontispiece.

A story of love and politics,--more especially a picture of a country
editor's life in Indiana, but the charm of the book lies in the love
interest.

THE FLIRT. Illustrated by Clarence F. Underwood.

The "Flirt," the younger of two sisters, breaks one girl's engagement,
drives one man to suicide, causes the murder of another, leads another
to lose his fortune, and in the end marries a stupid and unpromising
suitor, leaving the really worthy one to marry her sister.

Ask for Complete free list of G. & D. Popular Copyrighted Fiction

Grosset & Dunlap, Publishers, New York




KATHLEEN NORRIS' STORIES

May be had wherever books are sold. Ask for Grosset & Dunlap's list

SISTERS. Frontispiece by Frank Street.

The California Redwoods furnish the background for this beautiful
story of sisterly devotion and sacrifice.

POOR, DEAR, MARGARET KIRBY.

Frontispiece by George Gibbs.

A collection of delightful stories, including "Bridging the Years" and
"The Tide-Marsh." This story is now shown in moving pictures.

JOSSELYN'S WIFE. Frontispiece by C. Allan Gilbert.

The story of a beautiful woman who fought a bitter fight for happiness
and love.

MARTIE, THE UNCONQUERED.

Illustrated by Charles E. Chambers.

The triumph of a dauntless spirit over adverse conditions.

THE HEART OF RACHAEL.

Frontispiece by Charles E. Chambers.

An interesting story of divorce and the problems that come with a
second marriage.

THE STORY OF JULIA PAGE.

Frontispiece by C. Allan Gilbert.

A sympathetic portrayal of the quest of a normal girl, obscure and
lonely, for the happiness of life.

SATURDAY'S CHILD. Frontispiece by F. Graham Cootes.

Can a girl, born in rather sordid conditions, lift herself through
sheer determination to the better things for which her soul hungered?

MOTHER. Illustrated by F. C. Yohn.

A story of the big mother heart that beats in the background of every
girl's life, and some dreams which came true.

Ask for Complete free list of G. & D. Popular Copyrighted Fiction

Grosset & Dunlap, Publishers, New York




JAMES OLIVER CURWOOD'S STORIES OF ADVENTURE

May be had wherever books are sold. Ask for Grosset & Dunlap's list

THE RIVER'S END

A story of the Royal Mounted Police.

THE GOLDEN SNARE

Thrilling adventures in the Far Northland.

NOMADS OF THE NORTH

The story of a bear-cub and a dog.

KAZAN

The tale of a "quarter-strain wolf and three-quarters husky" torn
between the call of the human and his wild mate.

BAREE, SON OF KAZAN

The story of the son of the blind Grey Wolf and the gallant part he
played in the lives of a man and a woman.

THE COURAGE OF CAPTAIN PLUM

The story of the King of Beaver Island, a Mormon colony, and his
battle with Captain Plum.

THE DANGER TRAIL

A tale of love, Indian vengeance, and a mystery of the North.

THE HUNTED WOMAN

A tale of a great fight in the "valley of gold" for a woman.

THE FLOWER OF THE NORTH

The story of Fort o' God, where the wild flavor of the wilderness is
blended with the courtly atmosphere of France.

THE GRIZZLY KING

The story of Thor, the big grizzly.

ISOBEL

A love story of the Far North.

THE WOLF HUNTERS

A thrilling tale of adventure in the Canadian wilderness.

THE GOLD HUNTERS

The story of adventure in the Hudson Bay wilds.

THE COURAGE OF MARGE O'DOONE

Filled with exciting incidents in the land of strong men and women.

BACK TO GOD'S COUNTRY

A thrilling story of the Far North. The great Photoplay was made from
this book.

Grosset & Dunlap, Publishers, New York




ZANE GREY'S NOVELS

May be had wherever books are sold. Ask for Grosset & Dunlap's list.

THE MAN OF THE FOREST

THE DESERT OF WHEAT

THE U. P. TRAIL

WILDFIRE

THE BORDER LEGION

THE RAINBOW TRAIL

THE HERITAGE OF THE DESERT

RIDERS OF THE PURPLE SAGE

THE LIGHT OF WESTERN STARS

THE LAST OF THE PLAINSMEN

THE LONE STAR RANGER

DESERT GOLD

BETTY ZANE

LAST OF THE GREAT SCOUTS

The life story of "Buffalo Bill" by his sister Helen Cody Wetmore,
with Foreword and conclusion by Zane Grey.

ZANE GREY'S BOOKS FOR BOYS

KEN WARD IN THE JUNGLE

THE YOUNG LION HUNTER

THE YOUNG FORESTER

THE YOUNG PITCHER

THE SHORT STOP

THE RED-HEADED OUTFIELD AND OTHER BASEBALL STORIES

Grosset & Dunlap, Publishers, New York




NOVELS OF FRONTIER LIFE BY WILLIAM MacLEOD RAINE

May be had wherever books are sold. Ask for Grosset & Dunlap's list.

MAVERICKS

A tale of the western frontier, where the "rustler" abounds. One of
the sweetest love stories ever told.

A TEXAS RANGER

How a member of the border police saved the life of an innocent man,
followed a fugitive to Wyoming, and then passed through deadly peril
to ultimate happiness.

WYOMING

In this vivid story the author brings out the turbid life of the
frontier with all its engaging dash and vigor.

RIDGWAY OF MONTANA

The scene is laid in the mining centers of Montana, where politics and
mining industries are the religion of the country.

BUCKY O'CONNOR

Every chapter teems with wholesome, stirring adventures, replete with
the dashing spirit of the border.

CROOKED TRAILS AND STRAIGHT

A story of Arizona: of swift-riding men and daring outlaws, of a
bitter feud between cattlemen and sheep-herders.

BRAND BLOTTERS

A story of the turbid life of the frontier with a charming love
interest running through its pages.

STEVE YEAGER

A story brimful of excitement, with enough gun-play and adventure to
suit anyone.

A DAUGHTER OF THE DONS

A Western story of romance and adventure, comprising a vivacious and
stirring tale.

THE HIGHGRADER

A breezy, pleasant and amusing love story of Western mining life.

THE PIRATE OF PANAMA

A tale of old-time pirates and of modern love, hate and adventure.

THE YUKON TRAIL

A crisply entertaining love story in the land where might makes
right.

THE VISION SPLENDID

In which two cousins are contestants for the same prizes: political
honors and the hand of a girl.

THE SHERIFF'S SON

The hero finally conquers both himself and his enemies and wins the
love of a wonderful girl.

Grosset & Dunlap, Publishers, New York




STORIES OF RARE CHARM BY GENE STRATTON-PORTER

May be had wherever books are sold. Ask for Grosset & Dunlap's list.

MICHAEL O'HALLORAN. Illustrated by Frances Rogers.

Michael is a quick-witted little Irish newsboy, living in Northern
Indiana. He adopts a deserted little girl, a cripple. He also assumes
the responsibility of leading the entire rural community upward and
onward.

LADDIE. Illustrated by Herman Pfeifer.

This is a bright, cheery tale with the scenes laid in Indiana. The
story is told by Little Sister, the youngest member of a large family,
but it is concerned not so much with childish doings as with the love
affairs of older members of the family. Chief among them is that of
Laddie and the Princess, an English girl who has come to live in the
neighborhood and about whose family there hangs a mystery,

THE HARVESTER. Illustrated fay W. L. Jacobs.

"The Harvester," is a man of the woods and fields, and if the book had
nothing in it but the splendid figure of this man it would be notable.
But when the Girl comes to his "Medicine Woods," there begins a
romance of the rarest idyllic quality.

FRECKLES. Illustrated.

Freckles is a nameless waif when the tale opens, but the way in which
he takes hold of life: the nature friendships he forms in the great
Limberlost Swamp; the manner in which everyone who meets him succumbs
to the charm of his engaging personality; and his love story with "The
Angel" are full of real sentiment.

A GIRL OF THE LIMBERLOST. Illustrated.

The story of a girl of the Michigan woods; a buoyant, loveable type of
the self-reliant American. Her philosophy is one of love and kindness
towards all things; her hope is never dimmed. And by the sheer beauty
of her soul, and the purity of her vision, she wins from barren and
unpromising surroundings those rewards of high courage.

AT THE FOOT OF THE RAINBOW. Illustrations in colors.

The scene of this charming love story is laid in Central Indiana. The
story is one of devoted friendship, and tender self-sacrificing love.
The novel is brimful of the most beautiful word painting of nature,
and its pathos and tender sentiment will endear it to all.

THE SONG OF THE CARDINAL. Profusely illustrated.

A love ideal of the Cardinal bird and his mate, told with delicacy and
humor.

Grosset & Dunlap, Publishers, New York




JACK LONDON'S NOVELS

May be had wherever books are sold. Ask for Grosset & Dunlap's list.

JOHN BARLEYCORN. Illustrated by H. T. Dunn.

This remarkable book is a record of the author's own amazing
experiences. This big, brawny world rover, who has been acquainted
with alcohol from boyhood, comes out boldly against John Barleycorn.
It is a string of exciting adventures, yet it forcefully conveys an
unforgetable idea and makes a typical Jack London book.

THE VALLEY OF THE MOON. Frontispiece by George Harper.

The story opens in the city slums where Billy Roberts, teamster and
ex-prize fighter, and Saxon Brown, laundry worker, meet and love and
marry. They tramp from one end of California to the other, and in the
Valley of the Moon find the farm paradise that is to be their
salvation.

BURNING DAYLIGHT. Four illustrations.

The story of an adventurer who went to Alaska and laid the foundations
of his fortune before the gold hunters arrived. Bringing his fortunes
to the States he is cheated out of it by a crowd of money kings, and
recovers it only at the muzzle of his gun. He then starts out as a
merciless exploiter on his own account. Finally he takes to drinking
and becomes a picture of degeneration. About this time he falls in
love with his stenographer and wins her heart but not her hand and
then--but read the story!

A SON OF THE SUN. Illustrated by A. O. Fischer and C. W. Ashley.

David Grief was once a light-haired, blue-eyed youth who came from
England to the South Seas in search of adventure. Tanned like a native
and as lithe as a tiger, he became a real son of the sun. The life
appealed to him and he remained and became very wealthy.

THE CALL OF THE WILD. Illustrations by Philip R. Goodwin and Charles
Livingston Bull. Decorations by Charles E. Hooper.

A book of dog adventures as exciting as any man's exploits could be.
Here is excitement to stir the blood and here is picturesque color to
transport the reader to primitive scenes.

THE SEA WOLF. Illustrated by W. J. Aylward.

Told by a man whom Fate suddenly swings from his fastidious life into
the power of the brutal captain of a sealing schooner. A novel of
adventure warmed by a beautiful love episode that every reader will
hail with delight.

WHITE FANG. Illustrated by Charles Livingston Bull.

"White Fang" is part dog, part wolf and all brute, living in the frozen
north; he gradually comes under the spell of man's companionship, and
surrenders all at the last in a fight with a bull dog. Thereafter he is
man's loving slave.

Grosset & Dunlap, Publishers, New York




RALPH CONNOR'S STORIES OF THE NORTHWEST

May be had wherever books me sold. Ask for Grosset & Dunlap's list

THE SKY PILOT IN NO MAN'S LAND

The clean-hearted, strong-limbed man of the West leaves his hills and
forests to fight the battle for freedom in the old world.

BLACK ROCK

A story of strong men in the mountains of the West.

THE SKY PILOT

A story of cowboy life, abounding in the freshest humor, the truest
tenderness and the finest courage.

THE PROSPECTOR

A tale of the foothills and of the man who came to them to lend a hand
to the lonely men and women who needed a protector.

THE MAN FROM GLENGARRY

This narrative brings us into contact with elemental and volcanic
human nature and with a hero whose power breathes from every word.

GLENGARRY SCHOOL DAYS

In this rough country of Glengarry, Ralph Connor has found human
nature in the rough.

THE DOCTOR

The story of a "preacher-doctor" whom big men and reckless men loved
for his unselfish life among them.

THE FOREIGNER

A tale of the Saskatchewan and of a "foreigner" who made a brave and
winning fight for manhood and love.

CORPORAL CAMERON

This splendid type of the upright, out-of-door man about which Ralph
Connor builds all his stories, appears again in this book.

Grosset & Dunlap, Publishers, New York




B. M. BOWER'S NOVELS

May be had wherever books are said. Ask for Grosset and Dunlap's
list.

CHIP OF THE FLYING U. Wherein the love affairs of Chip and Delia
Whitman are charmingly and humorously told.

THE HAPPY FAMILY. A lively and amusing story, dealing with the
adventures of eighteen jovial, big-hearted Montana cowboys.

HER PRAIRIE KNIGHT. Describing a gay party of Easterners who exchange
a cottage at Newport for a Montana ranch-house.

THE RANGE DWELLERS. Spirited action, a range feud between two
families, and a Romeo and Juliet courtship make this a bright, jolly
story.

THE LURE OF THE DIM TRAILS. A vivid portrayal of the experience of an
Eastern author among the cowboys.

THE LONESOME TRAIL. A little branch of sage brush and the recollection
of a pair of large brown eyes upset "Weary" Davidson's plans.

THE LONG SHADOW. A vigorous Western story, sparkling with the free
outdoor life of a mountain ranch. It is a fine love story.

GOOD INDIAN. A stirring romance of life on an Idaho ranch.

FLYING U RANCH. Another delightful story about Chip and his pals.

THE FLYING U'S LAST STAND. An amusing account of Chip and the other
boys opposing a party of school teachers.

THE UPHILL CLIMB. A story of a mountain ranch and of a man's hard
fight on the uphill road to manliness.

THE PHANTOM HERD. The title of a moving-picture staged to "New Mexico
by the Flying U" boys.

THE HERITAGE OF THE SIOUX. The "Flying U" boys stage a fake bank
robbery for film purposes which precedes a real one for lust of gold.

THE GRINGOS. A story of love and adventure on a ranch is California.

STARR OF THE DESERT. A New Mexico ranch story of mystery and
adventure.

THE LOOKOUT MAN. A Northern California story full of action,
excitement and love.

Grosset & Dunlap, Publishers, New York




ETHEL M. DELL'S NOVELS

May be had wherever books are sold. Ask for Grosset & Dunlap's list.

THE LAMP IN THE DESERT

The scene of this splendid story is laid in India and tells of the
lamp of love that continues to shine through all sorts of tribulations
to final happiness.

GREATHEART

The story of a cripple whose deformed body conceals a noble soul.

THE HUNDREDTH CHANCE

A hero who worked to win even when there was only "a hundredth
chance."

THE SWINDLER

The story of a "bad man's" soul revealed by a woman's faith.

THE TIDAL WAVE

Tales of love and of women who learned to know the true from the
false.

THE SAFETY CURTAIN

A very vivid love story of India. The volume also contains four other
long stories of equal interest.

Grosset & Dunlap, Publishers, New York




FLORENCE L. BARCLAY'S NOVELS

May be had wherever books are sold. Ask for Grosset & Dunlap's list.

THE WHITE LADIES OF WORCESTER

A novel of the 12th Century. The heroine, believing she had lost her
lover, enters a convent. He returns, and interesting developments
follow.

THE UPAS TREE

A love story of rare charm. It deals with a successful author and his
wife.

THROUGH THE POSTERN GATE

The story of a seven day courtship, in which the discrepancy in ages
vanished into insignificance before the convincing demonstration of
abiding love.

THE ROSARY

The story of a young artist who is reputed to love beauty above all
else in the world, but who, when blinded through an accident, gains
life's greatest happiness. A rare story of the great passion of two
real people superbly capable of love, its sacrifices and its exceeding
reward.

THE MISTRESS OF SHENSTONE

The lovely young Lady Ingleby, recently widowed by the death of a
husband who never understood her, meets a fine, clean young chap who
is ignorant of her title and they fall deeply in love with each other.
When he learns her real identity a situation of singular power is
developed.

THE BROKEN HALO

The story of a young man whose religious belief was shattered in
childhood and restored to him by the little white lady, many years
older than himself, to whom he is passionately devoted.

THE FOLLOWING OF THE STAR

The story of a young missionary, who, about to start for Africa,
marries wealthy Diana Rivers, in order to help her fulfill the
conditions of her uncle's will, and how they finally come to love each
other and are reunited after experiences that soften and purify.

Grosset & Dunlap, Publishers, New York






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Rim o' the World, by B. M. Bower

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RIM O' THE WORLD ***

***** This file should be named 29580.txt or 29580.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/5/8/29580/

Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
