The Project Gutenberg EBook of Practical High School Speller, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Practical High School Speller

Author: Various

Release Date: May 9, 2010 [EBook #32309]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRACTICAL HIGH SCHOOL SPELLER ***




Produced by Larry B. Harrison and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









  PRACTICAL HIGH SCHOOL
  SPELLER

  COMPILED BY
  TOBIAS O. CHEW, M.S.

  SUPERINTENDENT OF CITY SCHOOLS
  WASHBURN, WISCONSIN

  ALLYN AND BACON
  Boston  New York  Chicago




  COPYRIGHT, 1914,
  BY TOBIAS O. CHEW.

  DAAN

  Norwood Press
  J. S. Cushing Co.--Berwick & Smith Co.
  Norwood, Mass., U.S.A.




  Dedicated
  TO THE
  MANY HIGH SCHOOL SUPERINTENDENTS, PRINCIPALS, AND
  TEACHERS, WHO BY THEIR COOePERATION HAVE
  MADE POSSIBLE THE COMPILATION
  OF THIS BOOK




PREFACE


What are the words most commonly misspelled by the average high school
pupil? In an endeavor to solve this problem, two thousand letters,
with five postal cards in each, were sent to representative high
schools in every state in the United States, requesting the heads of
the various departments to report the words most commonly misspelled
in their classes. From the many thousand replies, this text-book has
been compiled.

The first word in Lesson I was sent in by seven hundred high school
teachers; the other words in this lesson show, by their order, the
frequency with which they appear in the replies. No word has been
considered unless suggested by at least two teachers. This book, then,
built on the judgment of those best qualified to know--the teachers
themselves--contains only the words most frequently misspelled by the
average high school pupil.

A simple phrase is placed after each word, illustrating its use, and
serving to identify it better than would a short, abstract definition.
The division of words into syllables with accent marks will be of
great assistance to the pupil, should there be any question in his
mind as to the correct pronunciation. The typography is based on the
idea that it will be a great help to the pupil in visualizing the
words if he sees them in script as well as in print.

                                                           T. O. CHEW.

    MARCH, 1914.




A FEW SIMPLE RULES FOR SPELLING


When the diphthongs _ei_ and _ie_ are pronounced _[=e]_, _c_ is
followed by _ei_, all other letters by _ie_. Examples: _ceiling_,
_receive_, _siege_, _believe_. Exceptions: _leisure_, _seize_,
_weird_. The word _slice_ will help pupils to remember this rule--_i_
after _l_ and _e_ after _c_ when applied to _believe_ and _receive_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Final _y_ following a consonant changes to _i_ before a suffix not
beginning with _i_. Examples: _busy_, _business_; _dry_, _dried_. When
the suffix begins with _i_, as in _-ing_ and _-ish_, the _y_ is
retained to avoid having double _i_. Examples: _try_, _trying_;
_baby_, _babyish_.

When the final _y_ follows a vowel, the _y_ is retained before a suffix.
Examples: _toy_, _toyed_; _betray_, _betrayed_; _annoy_, _annoyed_.

       *       *       *       *       *

To form the plural of words ending in _y_ following a consonant change
the _y_ to _i_ and add _es_. Examples: _quantity_, _quantities_;
_factory_, _factories_.

When the final _y_ follows a vowel, the _y_ is retained and _s_ added.
Examples: _journey_, _journeys_; _delay_, _delays_; _money_, _moneys_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Monosyllables and words accented on the last syllable, which end in a
single consonant, following a single vowel, double the final consonant
before a suffix beginning with a vowel. Examples: _hot_, _hotter_;
_begin_, _beginning_. Exceptions: (1) _gas_, _gases_. (2) The letters
_w_, _x_, and _y_ are not doubled. Examples: _show_, _showing_; _box_,
_boxed_; _pay_, _paying_.

In words not accented on the last syllable, the final consonant may or
may not be doubled. Examples: _traveler_ may be spelled _traveller_;
_canceled_, _cancelled_; etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

In words ending in unaccented _e_, the final _e_ is dropped before a
suffix beginning with a vowel. Examples: _come_, _coming_; _glue_,
_gluing_; _fine_, _finer_. Exceptions: (1) The _e_ is retained when it
is necessary to preserve the identity of the word, as _dyeing_,
_singeing_. (2) When the final _e_ is preceded by _o_, as _shoeing_,
_hoeing_. (3) After _c_ and _g_ when the suffix begins with _a_ or
_o_, as _peace_, _peaceable_; _outrage_, _outrageous_; _courage_,
_courageous_.




LESSON 1


  {separate}               =sep'a-rate= divisions

  {receive}                =re-ceive'= the letter

  {believe}                =be-lieve'= in God

  {until}                  =un-til'= next Monday

  {there}                  =there= he comes

  {their}                  =their= hats are new

  {principle}              =prin'ci-ple= of physics

  {principal}              =prin'ci-pal= parts of a verb

  {business}               =bus'i-ness= of the merchant

  {parallel}               =par'al-lel= lines

  {disappoint}             =dis-ap-point'= us by going

  {to}                     =to= go to town

  {too}                    =too= many rules

  {two}                    =two= dollars in cash

  {necessary}              =nec'es-sa-ry= food

  {judgment}               =judg'ment= of the court

  {all right}              =all right=, I shall come

  {disappear}              =dis-ap-pear'= from sight

  {grammar}                =gram'mar= of the language

  {privilege}              =priv'i-lege= to vote

  {beginning}              =be-gin'ning= of the war

  {government}             =gov'ern-ment= by the people

  {isosceles}              =i-sos'ce-les= triangle

  {laboratory}             =lab'o-ra-to-ry= of the chemist

  {finally}                =fi'nal-ly= it ended


LESSON 2

  {coming}                 =com'ing= home

  {seize}                  =seize= the opportunity

  {similarly}              =sim'i-lar-ly= made

  {similar}                =sim'i-lar= triangles

  {Parliament}             =Par'li-a-ment= of England

  {occasion}               =oc-ca'sion= for joy

  {description}            =de-scrip'tion= of the place

  {writing}                =writ'ing= with ink

  {development}            =de-vel'op-ment= of muscle

  {homologous}             =ho-mol'o-gous= figures

  {precede}                =pre-cede'= us down the street

  {recommend}              =rec-om-mend'= him for the work

  {whether}                =wheth'er= we go or stay

  {coefficient}            =co-ef-fi'cient= of the number

  {hypotenuse}             =hy-pot'e-nuse= of a triangle

  {siege}                  =siege= of Troy

  {immediately}            =im-me'di-ate-ly= after

  {already}                =al-read'y= the sun is up

  {forty}                  =for'ty= dollars a month

  {fourth}                 =fourth= house on the street

  {develop}                =de-vel'op= the Kodak film

  {together}               =to-geth'er= at home

  {chord}                  =chord= of a circle

  {cord}                   =cord= of wood

  {village}                =vil'lage= blacksmith


LESSON 3

  {hypothesis}             =hy-poth'e-sis= of a theorem

  {truly}                  =tru'ly= yours

  {accommodate}            =ac-com'mo-date= your friends

  {preparation}            =prep-a-ra'tion= for war

  {occurrence}             =oc-cur'rence= of importance

  {quiet}                  =qui'et= as a mouse

  {quite}                  =quite= a different thing

  {villain}                =vil'lain= in the play

  {vertical}               =ver'ti-cal= lines

  {February}               =Feb'ru-a-ry= twenty-second

  {angle}                  =an'gle= of a triangle

  {angel}                  =an'gel= in heaven

  {affect}                 =af-fect'= steel by heating it

  {effect}                 =ef-fect'= of heat on steel

  {balance}                =bal'ance= the account

  {equation}               =e-qua'tion= in algebra

  {professor}              =pro-fess'or= of Latin

  {stopped}                =stopped= by a policeman

  {lose}                   =lose= the money

  {loose}                  =loose= the dog's chain

  {losing}                 =los'ing= his grip

  {complement}             =com'ple-ment= of an angle

  {compliment}             =com'pli-ment= paid to the lady

  {corollary}              =cor'ol-la-ry= of the theorem

  {which}                  =which= man was that


LESSON 4

  {usually}                =u'su-al-ly= he walks to school

  {oxygen}                 =ox'y-gen= in the air

  {surprise}               =sur-prise'= party

  {proceed}                =pro-ceed'= with the work

  {quit}                   =quit= the job

  {appearance}             =ap-pear'ance= of the man

  {quadrilateral}          =quad-ri-lat'er-al= figure

  {quantity}               =quan'ti-ty= of sugar

  {received}               =re-ceived'= payment

  {theorem}                =the'o-rem= in geometry

  {acknowledgment}         =ac-knowl'edg-ment= of my letter

  {occurred}               =oc-curred'= to him suddenly

  {conscience}             =con'science= troubled him

  {athletics}              =ath-let'ics= in college

  {bisector}               =bi-sect'or= of an angle

  {piece}                  =piece= of pie

  {peace}                  =peace= on earth

  {plain}                  =plain= features

  {plane}                  =plane= geometry

  {speech}                 =speech= in the Senate

  {parallelogram}          =par-al-lel'o-gram= of forces

  {chauffeur}              =chauf-feur'= was reckless

  {describe}               =de-scribe'= his features

  {fulfil}                 =ful-fil'= our promise

  {participle}             =par'ti-ci-ple= of the verb


LESSON 5

  {tragedy}                =trag'e-dy= of Macbeth

  {capital}                =cap'i-tal= city of Texas

  {capitol}                =cap'i-tol= building

  {committee}              =com-mit'tee= meetings

  {perpendicular}          =per-pen-dic'u-lar= lines

  {auxiliary}              =aux-il'i-a-ry= verb

  {accept}                 =ac-cept'= my thanks

  {except}                 =ex-cept'= for this reason

  {odor}                   =o'dor= of tobacco

  {Mediterranean}          =Med-i-ter-ra'ne-an= Sea

  {polygon}                =pol'y-gon= of seven sides

  {superintendent}         =su-per-in-tend'ent= of schools

  {supersede}              =su-per-sede'= the old laws by new

  {always}                 =al'ways= the same

  {hoping}                 =hop'ing= all is well

  {hopping}                =hop'ping= on one foot

  {opposite}               =op'po-site= side of the street

  {opposition}             =op-po-si'tion= to the plan

  {rhombus}                =rhom'bus= in geometry

  {parentheses}            =pa-ren'the-ses= enclosed the phrase

  {straight}               =straight= lines of soldiers

  {strait}                 =strait= of Bosporus

  {definite}               =def'i-nite= number

  {gas}                    =gas= light is bright

  {prejudice}              =prej'u-dice= against him


LESSON 6

  {probably}               =prob'a-bly= we shall go

  {respectively}           =re-spec'tive-ly= equal to each other

  {respectfully}           =re-spect'ful-ly= yours

  {disease}                =dis-ease'= caused by germs

  {decease}                =de-cease'= of a friend

  {equivalent}             =e-quiv'a-lent= equations

  {height}                 =height= of the mountain

  {refer}                  =re-fer'= you to him

  {referred}               =re-ferred'= to you

  {referring}              =re-fer'ring= to your letter

  {soluble}                =sol'u-ble= in water

  {calendar}               =cal'en-dar= for next year

  {consul}                 =con'sul= at London

  {council}                =coun'cil= of war

  {counsel}                =coun'sel= is advice

  {control}                =con-trol'= of the business

  {led}                    =led= the way back

  {lead}                   =lead= is a soft metal

  {possession}             =pos-ses'sion= of the island

  {receipt}                =re-ceipt'= for payment

  {simultaneous}           =sim-ul-ta'ne-ous= equations

  {written}                =writ'ten= lesson

  {benefit}                =ben'e-fit= the health

  {ninety}                 =nine'ty= per cent

  {occasionally}           =oc-ca'sion-al-ly= it rains


LESSON 7

  {supplementary}          =sup-ple-men'ta-ry= angles

  {Wednesday}              =Wednes'day= morning

  {genitive}               =gen'i-tive= case

  {independent}            =in-de-pend'ent= country

  {misspelled}             =mis-spelled'= the words

  {sophomore}              =soph'o-more= class

  {busy}                   =bus'y= day at school

  {meant}                  =meant= to do well

  {ledger}                 =ledg'er= accounts

  {polynomial}             =pol-y-no'mi-al= of six terms

  {pursue}                 =pur-sue'= the game

  {adjacent}               =ad-ja'cent= angles

  {attract}                =at-tract'= his attention

  {Augustus}               =Au-gus'tus= Caesar

  {comparative}            =com-par'a-tive= degree

  {difference}             =dif'fer-ence= between two amounts

  {friend}                 =friend= of ours

  {frustum}                =frus'tum= of the pyramid

  {prairie}                =prai'rie= dogs

  {syntax}                 =syn'tax= of early Latin

  {whose}                  =whose= house is this

  {algebra}                =al'ge-bra= is studied at school

  {ammonia}                =am-mo'ni-a= for cleaning

  {embarrass}              =em-bar'rass= us

  {nickel}                 =nick'el= plated ware


LESSON 8

  {precipitate}            =pre-cip'i-tate= a panic

  {receivable}             =re-ceiv'a-ble= accounts

  {studying}               =stud'y-ing= the lesson

  {tariff}                 =tar'iff= bill of 1913

  {nominative}             =nom'i-na-tive= case

  {expenses}               =ex-pen'ses= were paid

  {coincide}               =co-in-cide'= with his views

  {apparatus}              =ap-pa-ra'tus= for the experiment

  {bicycle}                =bi'cy-cle= riding

  {dining}                 =din'ing= with friends

  {decide}                 =de-cide'= the question

  {disappointed}           =dis-ap-point'ed= candidate

  {criticise}              =crit'i-cise= the work

  {eligible}               =el'i-gi-ble= to enter

  {hear}                   =hear= the music

  {here}                   =here= they come

  {intercept}              =in-ter-cept'= the letters

  {herb}                   =herb= for medicinal use

  {stationary}             =sta'tion-a-ry= engine

  {stationery}             =sta'tion-er-y= for correspondence

  {omitted}                =o-mit'ted= the word

  {radical}                =rad'i-cal= views

  {weird}                  =weird= tales by Poe

  {temperature}            =tem'per-a-ture= of 90 degrees

  {equal}                  =e'qual= suffrage


LESSON 9

  {eighth}                 =eighth= day of the month

  {syllable}               =syl'la-ble= of a word

  {shepherd}               =shep'herd= of the flock

  {quotient}               =quo'tient= is the result in division

  {planned}                =planned= a long trip

  {niece}                  =niece= and nephew

  {homogeneous}            =ho-mo-ge'ne-ous= substances

  {governor}               =gov'ern-or= of Michigan

  {equilateral}            =e-qui-lat'er-al= triangle

  {attack}                 =at-tack'= the city

  {attacked}               =at-tacked'= by the enemy

  {across}                 =a-cross'= the ocean

  {crystal}                =crys'tal= of quartz

  {cylinder}               =cyl'in-der= of the engine

  {absence}                =ab'sence= from school

  {diagonal}               =di-ag'o-nal= of a square

  {miscellaneous}          =mis-cel-la'ne-ous= assortment

  {interest}               =in'ter-est= on the money

  {commercial}             =com-mer'cial= traveler

  {cemetery}               =cem'e-ter-y= lots

  {mischievous}            =mis'chie-vous= puppy

  {resources}              =re-sour'ces= of the bank

  {twelfth}                =twelfth= hour

  {where}                  =where= has he gone

  {reference}              =ref'er-ence= to the book


LESSON 10

  {writer}                 =writ'er= of poetry

  {write}                  =write= clearly

  {right}                  =right= hand side

  {rite}                   =rite= of the church

  {prove}                  =prove= the theorem

  {axiom}                  =ax'i-om= in geometry

  {mortgage}               =mort'gage= the farm

  {dependent}              =de-pend'ent= clause

  {deceive}                =de-ceive'= the enemy

  {Caesar}                 =Cae'sar= crossed the Rubicon

  {benefited}              =ben'e-fit-ed= by exercise

  {trapezoid}              =trap'e-zoid= drawn on the board

  {symmetrical}            =sym-met'ri-cal= figure

  {sincerely}              =sin-cere'ly= yours

  {rhythm}                 =rhythm= of music

  {source}                 =source= of the river

  {repetition}             =rep-e-ti'tion= is monotonous

  {religious}              =re-lig'ious= services

  {promissory}             =prom'is-so-ry= notes

  {possess}                =pos-sess'= the money

  {weather}                =weath'er= bureau

  {persuade}               =per-suade'= him to go

  {perhaps}                =per-haps'= I shall

  {oblige}                 =ob-lige'= me by going

  {alcohol}                =al'co-hol= lamp


LESSON 11

  {sovereign}              =sov'er-eign= of England

  {sovereignty}            =sov'er-eign-ty= of our country

  {antecedent}             =an-te-ce'dent= of the pronoun

  {allotment}              =al-lot'ment= of the estate

  {allotting}              =al-lot'ting= the Indian lands

  {treasurer}              =treas'ur-er= of the society

  {advise}                 =ad-vise'= him to go

  {advice}                 =ad-vice'= is cheap

  {accusative}             =ac-cu'sa-tive= case of a noun

  {dissolve}               =dis-solve'= the partnership

  {convenient}             =con-ven'ient= place

  {experience}             =ex-pe'ri-ence= is the best teacher

  {infinitive}             =in-fin'i-tive= form of a verb

  {library}                =li'bra-ry= books

  {occur}                  =oc-cur'= to one

  {pleasant}               =pleas'ant= occupation

  {potato}                 =po-ta'to= salad

  {practice}               =prac'tice= makes perfect

  {procedure}              =pro-ce'dure= in court

  {proportion}             =pro-por'tion= of the money

  {sentence}               =sen'tence= for life

  {supplement}             =sup'ple-ment= of an angle

  {vacuum}                 =vac'u-um= cleaner

  {secretary}              =sec're-ta-ry= of state

  {exaggerate}             =ex-ag'ger-ate= the story


LESSON 12

  {vegetable}              =veg'e-ta-ble= garden

  {arc}                    =arc= of a circle

  {ark}                    =ark= built by Noah

  {analyze}                =an'a-lyze= the sentence

  {different}              =dif'fer-ent= sizes

  {crystallize}            =crys'tal-lize= into snow

  {chief}                  =chief= man of the city

  {elimination}            =e-lim-i-na'tion= of the unfit

  {foreign}                =for'eign= countries

  {generally}              =gen'er-al-ly= known

  {guard}                  =guard= the treasure

  {leisure}                =lei'sure= moments

  {license}                =li'cense= to run an automobile

  {rhomboid}               =rhom'boid= figure in geometry

  {tyranny}                =tyr'an-ny= of the conqueror

  {vertices}               =ver'ti-ces= of the triangle

  {commission}             =com-mis'sion= form of government

  {disappointment}         =dis-ap-point'ment= is hard to bear

  {abbreviate}             =ab-bre'vi-ate= the word

  {conscious}              =con'scious= of her beauty

  {color}                  =col'or= of the flower

  {civilization}           =civ-i-li-za'tion= of the Greeks

  {chlorophyll}            =chlo'ro-phyll= of the plant

  {character}              =char'ac-ter= of the man

  {cavalry}                =cav'al-ry= regiment


LESSON 13

  {belief}                 =be-lief'= of the Christian

  {enemies}                =en'e-mies= of the nation

  {especially}             =es-pe'ci-al-ly= good

  {existence}              =ex-ist'ence= on earth

  {gauge}                  =gauge= the distance

  {honorable}              =hon'or-a-ble= man

  {lieutenant}             =lieu-ten'ant= of the army

  {literature}             =lit'er-a-ture= and language

  {necessity}              =ne-ces'si-ty= made him work

  {noticeable}             =no'tice-a-ble= features

  {occupation}             =oc-cu-pa'tion= of farming

  {Renaissance}            =Re-nais-sance'= Period

  {specimen}               =spec'i-men= of my writing

  {successfully}           =suc-cess'ful-ly= done

  {thorough}               =thor'ough= work

  {through}                =through= the window

  {threw}                  =threw= a stone

  {restaurant}             =res'tau-rant= in the hotel

  {off}                    =off= the track

  {of}                     =of= good repute

  {opportunity}            =op-por-tun'i-ty= to play

  {liability}              =li-a-bil'i-ty= of the company

  {liabilities}            =li-a-bil'i-ties= to meet

  {preceding}              =pre-ced'ing= word

  {reciprocal}             =re-cip'ro-cal= benefits


LESSON 14

  {salable}                =sal'a-ble= goods

  {salary}                 =sal'a-ry= received for work

  {sense}                  =sense= of hearing

  {shining}                =shin'ing= star

  {succeed}                =suc-ceed'= in doing good

  {success}                =suc-cess'= in the work

  {secede}                 =se-cede'= from the Union

  {Fahrenheit}             =Fah'ren-heit= thermometer

  {address}                =ad-dress'= me in Chicago

  {college}                =col'lege= athletics

  {circumstances}          =cir'cum-stan-ces= alter cases

  {choose}                 =choose= the best

  {Henry}                  =Hen'ry= VIII of England

  {physiology}             =phys-i-ol'o-gy= is interesting

  {apparent}               =ap-par'ent= carelessness

  {alligators}             =al'li-ga-tors= live in Florida

  {divisible}              =di-vi'si-ble= numbers

  {declension}             =de-clen'sion= of the noun

  {course}                 =course= of the river

  {coarse}                 =coarse= and fine salt

  {convenience}            =con-ven'ience= of electric lights

  {clothes}                =clothes= do not make the man

  {buried}                 =bur'ied= in the sand

  {boundary}               =bound'a-ry= line of Texas

  {either}                 =ei'ther= man may go


LESSON 15

  {exceed}                 =ex-ceed'= the speed limit

  {know}                   =know= how to spell

  {no}                     =no= boy should lie

  {goddess}                =god'dess= of Liberty

  {medians}                =me'di-ans= of a triangle

  {planning}               =plan'ning= to build the house

  {phosphorus}             =phos'phor-us= matches glow

  {sufficient}             =suf-fi'cient= reason for

  {proportional}           =pro-por'tion-al= quantities

  {recognize}              =rec'og-nize= the fact

  {simile}                 =sim'i-le= and metaphor

  {sure}                   =sure= of himself

  {transferred}            =trans-ferred'= to another wagon

  {Tuesday}                =Tues'day= is ironing day

  {efficiency}             =ef-fi'cien-cy= of the machine

  {ecstasy}                =ec'sta-sy= of delight

  {excel}                  =ex-cel'= in feats of strength

  {enemy}                  =en'e-my= of our country

  {crystallization}        =crys-tal-li-za'tion= of water

  {dropped}                =dropped= from a balloon

  {criticism}              =crit'i-cism= of his work

  {conceive}               =con-ceive'= of any reason

  {capillary}              =cap'il-la-ry= attraction

  {cancel}                 =can'cel= the debt

  {besiege}                =be-siege'= the city


LESSON 16

  {zinc}                   =zinc= is a useful metal

  {thoroughly}             =thor'ough-ly= aroused

  {therefore}              =there'fore= he may not go

  {rhyme}                  =rhyme= of the verses

  {really}                 =re'al-ly= fresh eggs

  {proprietor}             =pro-pri'e-tor= of the hotel

  {practical}              =prac'ti-cal= application

  {positive}               =pos'i-tive= of the fact

  {juice}                  =juice= of the fruit

  {origin}                 =or'i-gin= of man

  {segment}                =seg'ment= of a line

  {numerator}              =nu'mer-a-tor= of a fraction

  {measurement}            =meas'ure-ment= of the distance

  {integral}               =in'te-gral= parts

  {exponent}               =ex-po'nent= of the number

  {equiangular}            =e-qui-an'gu-lar= triangles

  {equally}                =e'qual-ly= divided

  {athlete}                =ath'lete= in training

  {acceptance}             =ac-cept'ance= of the position

  {achievement}            =a-chieve'ment= of success

  {agreement}              =a-gree'ment= between the two

  {arrangement}            =ar-range'ment= of the furniture

  {divide}                 =di-vide'= the apple

  {disappeared}            =dis-ap-peared'= in the distance

  {despair}                =de-spair'= of the condemned


LESSON 17

  {descendants}            =de-scend'ants= of Adam

  {declarative}            =de-clar'a-tive= sentence

  {consciousness}          =con'scious-ness= of power

  {conscientious}          =con-sci-en'tious= in all things

  {Connecticut}            =Con-nect'i-cut= River

  {committed}              =com-mit'ted= a serious crime

  {chosen}                 =cho'sen= people

  {till}                   =till= the soil

  {barbarous}              =bar'ba-rous= tribes of Africa

  {symmetry}               =sym'met-ry= of a circle

  {specific}               =spe-cif'ic= reasons

  {sieve}                  =sieve= for sifting flour

  {separation}             =sep-a-ra'tion= of gold from silver

  {relieve}                =re-lieve'= the tired sentry

  {relief}                 =re-lief'= expedition

  {recommendation}         =rec-om-men-da'tion= for the place

  {Protestant}             =Prot'es-tant= church

  {prophecy}               =proph'e-cy= of Elijah

  {prophesy}               =proph'e-sy= fair weather

  {pneumatic}              =pneu-mat'ic= tire

  {pendulum}               =pen'du-lum= of a clock

  {paid}                   =paid= in full

  {oscillation}            =os-cil-la'tion= of a pendulum

  {medieval}               =me-di-e'val= history

  {larvae}                 =lar'vae= of the fly


LESSON 18

  {indicative}             =in-dic'a-tive= mode

  {imperative}             =im-per'a-tive= manner

  {familiar}               =fa-mil'iar= scenes

  {essential}              =es-sen'tial= to life

  {aqueduct}               =aq'ue-duct= for the city water

  {atmosphere}             =at'mos-phere= of the earth

  {dyeing}                 =dye'ing= the cloth red

  {dying}                  =dy'ing= gladiator

  {disappearance}          =dis-ap-pear'ance= of the snow

  {destroy}                =de-stroy'= the walls

  {desirable}              =de-sir'a-ble= occupation

  {cupboard}               =cup'board= was bare

  {custom}                 =cus'tom= of the country

  {compel}                 =com-pel'= him to study

  {cereal}                 =ce're-al= for breakfast

  {serial}                 =se'ri-al= story

  {ceiling}                =ceil'ing= of the room

  {sealing}                =seal'ing= the jar of fruit

  {cease}                  =cease= your noise

  {carrying}               =car'ry-ing= the load

  {characteristics}        =char-ac-ter-is'tics= of the man

  {buoyancy}               =buoy'an-cy= of water

  {brief}                  =brief= tale of mystery

  {bisect}                 =bi-sect'= the line

  {binomial}               =bi-no'mi-al= theorem


LESSON 19

  {before}                 =be-fore'= we go to sleep

  {transitive}             =trans'i-tive= verb

  {women}                  =wom'en= wish to vote

  {victuals}               =vict'uals= to eat

  {very}                   =ver'y= often late

  {vengeance}              =venge'ance= is mine

  {thermometer}            =ther-mom'e-ter= registered 0 deg.

  {synonym}                =syn'o-nym= of the word

  {surely}                 =sure'ly= he will not

  {succeeded}              =suc-ceed'ed= in finding work

  {siphon}                 =si'phon= of soda

  {scissors}               =scis'sors= will cut

  {science}                =sci'ence= of medicine

  {scene}                  =scene= of the tragedy

  {safety}                 =safe'ty= valve on the engine

  {rhetoric}               =rhet'o-ric= is a useful study

  {resistance}             =re-sist'ance= to opposition

  {representative}         =rep-re-sent'a-tive= of our district

  {religion}               =re-lig'ion= of the Christians

  {remember}               =re-mem'ber= the Maine

  {proteids}               =pro'te-ids= build muscle

  {preferred}              =pre-ferred'= to others

  {plebeian}               =ple-be'ian= people of Rome

  {pistil}                 =pis'til= of a flower

  {pistol}                 =pis'tol= was loaded


LESSON 20

  {perimeter}              =pe-rim'e-ter= of a polygon

  {omission}               =o-mis'sion= of a letter

  {occurring}              =oc-cur'ring= to us

  {neuter}                 =neu'ter= gender

  {neither}                =nei'ther= one may go

  {monastery}              =mon'as-ter-y= of the church

  {merchandise}            =mer'chan-dise= to sell

  {lightning}              =light'ning= conductor

  {legible}                =leg'i-ble= handwriting

  {later}                  =la'ter= edition

  {laid}                   =laid= upon the table

  {knew}                   =knew= the meaning

  {new}                    =new= hat for Easter

  {heir}                   =heir= to the fortune

  {forcible}               =for'ci-ble= arguments

  {excellent}              =ex'cel-lent= reasons

  {excellence}             =ex'cel-lence= of the food

  {equilibrium}            =e-qui-lib'ri-um= was maintained

  {equidistant}            =e-qui-dis'tant= from two points

  {accuracy}               =ac'cu-ra-cy= of his addition

  {accession}              =ac-ces'sion= of property

  {arithmetic}             =a-rith'me-tic= and algebra

  {any}                    =an'y= more apples

  {many}                   =man'y= were called

  {annual}                 =an'nu-al= election of officers


LESSON 21

  {analytic}               =an-a-lyt'ic= geometry

  {altar}                  =al'tar= in the church

  {alter}                  =al'ter= the conditions

  {advertise}              =ad'ver-tise= in the magazines

  {heinous}                =hei'nous= crime

  {nucleus}                =nu'cle-us= of the collection

  {Niagara}                =Ni-ag'a-ra= Falls

  {negotiability}          =ne-go-tia-bil'i-ty= of the note

  {negotiate}              =ne-go'ti-ate= a loan

  {negotiable}             =ne-go'tia-ble= paper

  {mucilage}               =mu'ci-lage= on the envelope

  {mischief}               =mis'chief= afoot

  {metaphor}               =met'a-phor= in rhetoric

  {mathematics}            =math-e-mat'ics= requires study

  {manual}                 =man'u-al= training

  {erect}                  =e-rect'= position of a soldier

  {latter}                 =lat'ter= is opposed to former

  {jealous}                =jeal'ous= of his rival

  {inventory}              =in'ven-to-ry= of the goods

  {indelible}              =in-del'i-ble= ink for marking linen

  {immigrant}              =im'mi-grant= to America from Italy

  {emigrant}               =em'i-grant= from America to Italy

  {imaginary}              =im-ag'i-na-ry= ills

  {hygiene}                =hy'gi-ene= and health

  {having}                 =hav'ing= a good time


LESSON 22

  {fundamental}            =fun-da-men'tal= principles

  {fulfilled}              =ful-filled'= his contract

  {freight}                =freight= cars were wrecked

  {formerly}               =for'mer-ly= he was rich

  {financial}              =fi-nan'cial= disaster

  {feudal}                 =feu'dal= castles on the Rhine

  {embarrassment}          =em-bar'rass-ment= made her blush

  {does}                   =does= he know

  {doze}                   =doze= before the fireplace

  {descent}                =de-scent'= of man

  {descend}                =de-scend'= the ladder

  {denominator}            =de-nom'i-na-tor= of the fraction

  {definition}             =def-i-ni'tion= of the word

  {defense} }              =defense= of the city
  {defence} }

  {defendant}              =de-fend'ant= in the law suit

  {commensurable}          =com-men'su-ra-ble= line-segments

  {Christian}              =Chris'tian= church

  {changeable}             =change'a-ble= weather

  {careful}                =care'ful= of her clothes

  {campaign}               =cam-paign'= of the war

  {masculine}              =mas'cu-line= gender

  {fictitious}             =fic-ti'tious= names

  {chargeable}             =charge'a-ble= to the account

  {bureau}                 =bu'reau= of information


LESSON 23

  {bookkeeping}            =book'keep-ing= class

  {Bible}                  =Bi'ble= study on Sunday

  {beneficial}             =ben-e-fi'cial= to the health

  {base}                   =base= motives

  {bass}                   =bass= voice

  {electrolysis}           =e-lec-trol'y-sis= of water

  {tried}                  =tried= to do his work

  {trial}                  =tri'al= by jury

  {woman}                  =wom'an= and man

  {those}                  =those= oranges are sweet

  {thief}                  =thief= who stole

  {suspense}               =sus-pense'= is terrible

  {stomach}                =stom'ach= holds food

  {seized}                 =seized= the opportunity

  {remittance}             =re-mit'tance= by check

  {proof}                  =proof= of his guilt

  {probable}               =prob'a-ble= showers

  {pressure}               =pres'sure= of the weight

  {prefer}                 =pre-fer'= an honest man

  {pneumonia}              =pneu-mo'ni-a= is dangerous

  {perform}                =per-form'= the ceremony

  {perspiration}           =per-spi-ra'tion= from exercise

  {peaceable}              =peace'a-ble= nation

  {paraffin}               =par'af-fin= candles

  {operation}              =op-er-a'tion= for appendicitis


LESSON 24

  {omit}                   =o-mit'= the word

  {occupy}                 =oc'cu-py= a seat

  {recollect}              =rec-ol-lect'= the incident

  {suppose}                =sup-pose'= Mars is inhabited

  {advertisement}          =ad-ver-tise'ment= in the paper

  {acknowledge}            =ac-knowl'edge= the defeat

  {author}                 =au'thor= of the story

  {attendance}             =at-tend'ance= at school

  {assassination}          =as-sas-si-na'tion= of Lincoln

  {asked}                  =asked= for help

  {ascend}                 =as-cend'= the ladder

  {article}                =ar'ti-cle= in the paper

  {Arthur}                 =Ar'thur= and his Round Table

  {architecture}           =ar'chi-tec-ture= of the Greeks

  {arctic}                 =arc'tic= regions

  {approximate}            =ap-prox'i-mate= number

  {appreciate}             =ap-pre'ci-ate= your kindness

  {Antarctic}              =Ant-arc'tic= Ocean

  {ancient}                =an'cient= history

  {altogether}             =al-to-geth'er= the best

  {allege}                 =al-lege'= that he did it

  {allegiance}             =al-le'giance= to the king

  {alkali}                 =al'ka-li= salt

  {algebraic}              =al-ge-bra'ic= equation

  {agreeable}              =a-gree'a-ble= companion


LESSON 25

  {aggregation}            =ag-gre-ga'tion= of capital

  {accepted}               =ac-cept'ed= the gift

  {oblique}                =ob-lique'= lines

  {negative}               =neg'a-tive= answer

  {narrative}              =nar'ra-tive= poem

  {natural}                =nat'u-ral= laws

  {movable}                =mov'a-ble=, not fixed

  {mold}  }                =mold= the iron into a ball
  {mould} }                =mould= on the bread

  {minute}                 =min'ute= is 60 seconds

  {massacre}               =mas'sa-cre= of the Indians

  {manufacture}            =man-u-fac'ture= of cloth

  {maintenance}            =main'te-nance= of an army

  {logarithms}             =log'a-rithms= in mathematics

  {linear}                 =lin'e-ar= measure

  {lien}                   =li'en= on the property

  {knight}                 =knight= templar

  {intelligence}           =in-tel'li-gence= of the man

  {integer}                =in'te-ger= or whole number

  {incidence}              =in'ci-dence= of a ray of light

  {impossible}             =im-pos'si-ble= to go

  {imagination}            =im-ag-i-na'tion= of the child

  {horizontal}             =hor-i-zon'tal= bars

  {grateful}               =grate'ful= for the help

  {gases}                  =gas'es= from combustion


LESSON 26

  {feudalism}              =feu'dal-ism= in old England

  {feminine}               =fem'i-nine= apparel

  {fascinate}              =fas'ci-nate= them with her charm

  {expense}                =ex-pense'= of the journey

  {emperor}                =em'per-or= of India

  {efflorescence}          =ef-flo-res'cence= of the flowers

  {ecclesiastical}         =ec-cle-si-as'ti-cal= robes

  {doesn't}                =does'n't= he know

  {diaphragm}              =di'a-phragm= expansion

  {countries}              =coun'tries= of Europe

  {metonymy}               =me-ton'y-my= in rhetoric

  {drowned}                =drowned= in the lake

  {discipline}             =dis'ci-pline= in the school

  {diphtheria}             =diph-the'ri-a= is serious

  {desert}                 =des'ert= of Sahara

  {dessert}                =des-sert'= of strawberries

  {Delaware}               =Del'a-ware= River

  {dialogue}               =di'a-logue= between two boys

  {counterfeit}            =coun'ter-feit= dollar

  {costume}                =cos'tume= for the play

  {consonant}              =con'so-nant= of the alphabet

  {conqueror}              =con'quer-or= of the Romans

  {confederacy}            =con-fed'er-a-cy= of the states

  {concern}                =con-cern'= yourself with his safety

  {concede}                =con-cede'= the point


LESSON 27

  {complexion}             =com-plex'ion= of the girl

  {comparison}             =com-par'i-son= of the two

  {coherence}              =co-her'ence= of the composition

  {chattel}                =chat'tel mortgage=

  {catalogue}              =cat'a-logue= of the library

  {candidate}              =can'di-date= for senator

  {canceled}               =can'celed= the note

  {economic}               =ec-o-nom'ic= value

  {buoyant}                =buoy'ant= spirits

  {biscuit}                =bis'cuit= for breakfast

  {barometer}              =ba-rom'e-ter= indicated a storm

  {tries}                  =tries= to win the race

  {variable}               =va'ri-a-ble= winds

  {usual}                  =u'su-al= occurrence

  {tobacco}                =to-bac'co= from Virginia

  {though}                 =though= he spoke, no one heard

  {surprised}              =sur-prised'= by the news

  {superstitious}          =su-per-sti'tious= persons

  {successful}             =suc-cess'ful= in the contest

  {subtract}               =sub-tract'= 2 from 6

  {partition}              =par-ti'tion= between the rooms

  {particular}             =par-tic'u-lar= about his clothes

  {secession}              =se-ces'sion= of the South

  {salaries}               =sal'a-ries= paid to workers

  {reservoir}              =res'er-voir= full of water


LESSON 28

  {representation}         =rep-re-sen-ta'tion= of the play

  {difficulty}             =dif'fi-cul-ty= of the lesson

  {pulley}                 =pul'ley= wheel

  {proceeded}              =pro-ceed'ed= on his way

  {perceive}               =per-ceive'= the fine points

  {ostracism}              =os'tra-cism= from society

  {ostracise}              =os'tra-cise= the undesirable

  {abbreviation}           =ab-bre-vi-a'tion= of the word

  {accelerate}             =ac-cel'er-ate= the speed

  {boundaries}             =bound'a-ries= of the country

  {asparagus}              =as-par'a-gus= served for dinner

  {combustible}            =com-bus'ti-ble= substances

  {conciliation}           =con-cil-i-a'tion= of the colonies

  {decision}               =de-ci'sion= of the judge

  {declaration}            =dec-la-ra'tion= of independence

  {especial}               =es-pe'cial= brand of goods

  {extremities}            =ex-trem'i-ties= of the body

  {fertile}                =fer'tile= soil of Kansas

  {genius}                 =gen'ius= of Edison

  {hydrochloric}           =hy-dro-chlo'ric= acid

  {inseparable}            =in-sep'a-ra-ble= friends

  {jeopardy}               =jeop'ard-y= of his life

  {knowledge}              =knowl'edge= is power

  {liquefy}                =liq'ue-fy= the air

  {mileage}                =mile'age= tickets


LESSON 29

  {nuisance}               =nui'sance= to be prohibited

  {original}               =o-rig'i-nal= manuscript

  {parasite}               =par'a-site= on the plant

  {quantities}             =quan'ti-ties= of sand on the shore

  {ridiculous}             =ri-dic'u-lous= actions

  {particle}               =par'ti-cle= of gold

  {territory}              =ter'ri-to-ry= of Alaska

  {accompaniment}          =ac-com'pa-ni-ment= on the piano

  {concentric}             =con-cen'tric= circles

  {collateral}             =col-lat'er-al= for the loan

  {constitution}           =con-sti-tu'tion= of the United States

  {column}                 =col'umn= of soldiers

  {deficit}                =def'i-cit= in the funds

  {ellipse}                =el-lipse'= in geometry

  {eliminate}              =e-lim'i-nate= the bad

  {guardian}               =guard'i-an= angel

  {hereditary}             =he-red'i-ta-ry= characteristics

  {interrogative}          =in-ter-rog'a-tive= sentence

  {jealousy}               =jeal'ous-y= of a lover

  {marriage}               =mar'riage= ceremony

  {ninetieth}              =nine'ti-eth= year

  {participial}            =par-ti-cip'i-al= phrase

  {paragraph}              =par'a-graph= of a story

  {psychology}             =psy-chol'o-gy= is a science

  {precedent}              =prec'e-dent= was established


LESSON 30

  {reconcile}              =rec'on-cile= the quarreling

  {schedule}               =sched'ule= of the races

  {significance}           =sig-nif'i-cance= of the remark

  {skilful}                =skil'ful= worker

  {because}                =be-cause'= he came

  {botany}                 =bot'a-ny= tells about plants

  {conjugate}              =con'ju-gate= the verb

  {continually}            =con-tin'u-al-ly= complaining

  {chlorine}               =chlo'rine= gas

  {deleble}                =del'e-ble= ink may be erased

  {frolicking}             =frol'ick-ing= children

  {didn't}                 =did'n't= know how

  {dimensions}             =di-men'sions= of the room

  {emphasize}              =em'pha-size= its importance

  {identity}               =i-den'ti-ty= of the injured man

  {illustrate}             =il-lus'trate= the book

  {phenomenal}             =phe-nom'e-nal= escape

  {innocence}              =in'no-cence= of a babe

  {society}                =so-ci'e-ty= people

  {solemn}                 =sol'emn= as a judge

  {stopping}               =stop'ping= the quarrel

  {vapor}                  =va'por= from the water

  {veteran}                =vet'er-an= of the Civil War

  {warrior}                =war'rior= bold

  {acquiesce}              =ac-qui-esce'= in the plan


LESSON 31

  {were}                   =were= you there

  {we're}                  =we're= not going

  {acquaintance}           =ac-quaint'ance= with many persons

  {certainly}              =cer'tain-ly= he will come

  {chimney}                =chim'ney= on the house

  {courteous}              =cour'te-ous= manner

  {disagree}               =dis-a-gree'= with each other

  {emphasis}               =em'pha-sis= on the first syllable

  {efficient}              =ef-fi'cient= bookkeeper

  {erroneous}              =er-ro'ne-ous= statement

  {imagine}                =im-ag'ine= a world without water

  {mercantile}             =mer'can-tile= trade

  {numerical}              =nu-mer'i-cal= quantity

  {irrepressible}          =ir-re-press'i-ble= child

  {quarrel}                =quar'rel= over money

  {ratio}                  =ra'tio= of 2 to 3

  {rinse}                  =rinse= the dishes

  {traveling}              =trav'el-ing= man

  {villages}               =vil'lages= along the railroad

  {whole}                  =whole= numbers

  {hole}                   =hole= in the wall

  {wholly}                 =whol'ly= to blame

  {holy}                   =ho'ly= Bible

  {admirable}              =ad'mir-a-ble= conduct

  {admissible}             =ad-mis'si-ble= evidence


LESSON 32

  {correspond}             =cor-re-spond'= with each other

  {captain}                =cap'tain= of the boat

  {dissimilar}             =dis-sim'i-lar= objects

  {division}               =di-vi'sion= of the estate

  {evaporate}              =e-vap'o-rate= the water

  {guarantee}              =guar-an-tee'= the goods

  {history}                =his'to-ry= of America

  {interpret}              =in-ter'pret= the message

  {mercury}                =mer'cu-ry= in the thermometer

  {nonsense}               =non'sense= rhyme

  {presence}               =pres'ence= of mind

  {presents}               =pres'ents= given at Christmas

  {reign}                  =reign= of the king

  {rain}                   =rain= was falling

  {rein}                   =rein= for driving the horse

  {review}                 =re-view'= the parade

  {studied}                =stud'ied= the lesson

  {subtend}                =sub-tend'= an angle

  {common}                 =com'mon= law

  {carefully}              =care'ful-ly= prepared

  {complete}               =com-plete'= story

  {drooped}                =drooped= and wilted

  {holiday}                =hol'i-day= on July Fourth

  {indefinite}             =in-def'i-nite= report

  {interior}               =in-te'ri-or= of the building


LESSON 33

  {nineteen}               =nine'teen= dollars

  {ninth}                  =ninth= day of the month

  {profession}             =pro-fes'sion= of law

  {pyramids}               =pyr'a-mids= of Egypt

  {possessive}             =pos-ses'sive= case

  {phrase}                 =phrase= of a sentence

  {phase}                  =phase= of the subject

  {quarantine}             =quar'an-tine= station

  {quantitative}           =quan'ti-ta-tive= analysis

  {quarter}                =quar'ter= of a dollar

  {entrance}               =en'trance= to the hall

  {running}                =run'ning= the race

  {sulphur}                =sul'phur= matches

  {swimming}               =swim'ming= in the lake

  {traffic}                =traf'fic= of the road

  {tolerance}              =tol'er-ance= of the government

  {unnecessary}            =un-nec'es-sa-ry= work

  {wrapped}                =wrapped= in a blanket

  {anxious}                =anx'ious= moments

  {abscess}                =ab'scess= in the ear

  {bankruptcy}             =bank'rupt-cy= of the firm

  {crystalline}            =crys'tal-line= lens of the eye

  {communicate}            =com-mu'ni-cate= with him

  {courtesy}               =cour'te-sy= of the official

  {dilapidated}            =di-lap'i-da-ted= house


LESSON 34

  {dyspepsia}              =dys-pep'si-a= tablets

  {effervescence}          =ef-fer-ves'cence= of soda water

  {electricity}            =e-lec-tric'i-ty= for power

  {eccentric}              =ec-cen'tric= person

  {grieve}                 =grieve= over misfortune

  {gaseous}                =gas'e-ous= mixture

  {geometry}               =ge-om'e-try= is studied in school

  {initiatory}             =in-i'ti-a-to-ry= ceremony

  {inconvenience}          =in-con-ven'ience= of the plans

  {influential}            =in-flu-en'tial= man

  {inaugurate}             =in-au'gu-rate= the president

  {journal}                =jour'nal= for bookkeeping

  {librarian}              =li-bra'ri-an= of the city library

  {miracle}                =mir'a-cle= of the loaves and fishes

  {malleability}           =mal-le-a-bil'i-ty= of gold

  {partner}                =part'ner= in the business

  {passed}                 =passed= by the house

  {past}                   =past= and gone

  {sociable}               =so'cia-ble= person

  {synecdoche}             =syn-ec'do-che= in rhetoric

  {statistics}             =sta-tis'tics= of the army

  {valleys}                =val'leys= between the mountains

  {arithmetical}           =ar-ith-met'i-cal= progression

  {alimentary}             =al-i-men'ta-ry= canal

  {amateur}                =am'a-teur= theatricals


LESSON 35

  {acquainted}             =ac-quain'ted= with the man

  {account}                =ac-count'= for the loss

  {alliances}              =al-li'an-ces= of the government

  {abdomen}                =ab-do'men= contains the intestines

  {accompanying}           =ac-com'pa-ny-ing= the singer

  {balanced}               =bal'anced= the account

  {conceal}                =con-ceal'= his identity

  {cession}                =ces'sion= of the property

  {session}                =ses'sion= of Congress

  {civilize}               =civ'i-lize= the savages

  {contemporary}           =con-tem'po-ra-ry= authors

  {discussion}             =dis-cus'sion= of the question

  {emanates}               =em'a-nates= from the sun

  {embezzlement}           =em-bez'zle-ment= of the money

  {fiery}                  =fier'y= horse

  {grievance}              =griev'ance= of the boy

  {general}                =gen'er-al= knowledge

  {illegible}              =il-leg'i-ble= handwriting

  {imagery}                =im'age-ry= of poetry

  {immense}                =im-mense'= building

  {kerosene}               =ker'o-sene= oil

  {lying}                  =ly'ing= is contemptible

  {literal}                =lit'er-al= meaning

  {lilies}                 =lil'ies= of the field

  {mechanical}             =me-chan'i-cal= engineer


LESSON 36

  {material}               =ma-te'ri-al= of good quality

  {partially}              =par'tial-ly= successful

  {physician}              =phy-si'cian= in the hospital

  {sympathize}             =sym'pa-thize= with the unfortunate

  {syllogism}              =syl'lo-gism= of his reasoning

  {succession}             =suc-ces'sion= of rainy days

  {strategy}               =strat'e-gy= of the general

  {accumulate}             =ac-cu'mu-late= savings

  {advertising}            =ad-ver-tis'ing= the goods

  {affidavit}              =af-fi-da'vit= of the facts

  {again}                  =a-gain'= and again he shouted

  {beautiful}              =beau'ti-ful= flowers

  {bananas}                =ba-na'nas= grow on trees

  {balloon}                =bal-loon'= ascension

  {cooeperation}            =co-op-er-a'tion= of the employees

  {cooerdinate}             =co-or'di-nate= clauses

  {commence}               =com-mence'= the work

  {diminish}               =di-min'ish= the speed

  {disagreeable}           =dis-a-gree'a-ble= weather

  {elementary}             =el-e-men'ta-ry= text-book

  {exercise}               =ex'er-cise= the muscles

  {finely}                 =fine'ly= engraved

  {impel}                  =im-pel'= the workers

  {fusion}                 =fu'sion= of metals

  {multiplicand}           =mul-ti-pli-cand'= of the example


LESSON 37

  {musician}               =mu-si'cian= in the band

  {making}                 =ma'king= the dress

  {pronunciation}          =pro-nun-ci-a'tion= of the word

  {peculiar}               =pe-cul'iar= habit

  {irritable}              =ir'ri-ta-ble= disposition

  {people}                 =peo'ple= in the city

  {specially}              =spe'cial-ly= prepared

  {serviceable}            =ser'vice-a-ble= tools

  {sergeant}               =ser'geant= of the company

  {vacancy}                =va'can-cy= of the office

  {confederate}            =con-fed'er-ate= in the plot

  {correspondence}         =cor-re-spond'ence= between friends

  {allies}                 =al-lies'= of the army

  {allusion}               =al-lu'sion= to his past

  {alternate}              =al'ter-nate= to the convention

  {amount}                 =a-mount'= of the bill

  {annually}               =an'nu-al-ly= taxed

  {apologize}              =a-pol'o-gize= for your blunder

  {architect}              =ar'chi-tect= of the building

  {breadth}                =breadth= of the cloth

  {break}                  =break= the bottle

  {brake}                  =brake= to stop a wheel

  {dissatisfy}             =dis-sat'is-fy= the customer

  {distillation}           =dis-til-la'tion= of the liquid

  {experiment}             =ex-per'i-ment= in chemistry


LESSON 38

  {extreme}                =ex-treme'= weather

  {vaccinate}              =vac'ci-nate= for smallpox

  {valuable}               =val'u-a-ble= jewels

  {unusual}                =un-u'su-al= performance

  {unite}                  =u-nite'= the pair

  {grievous}               =griev'ous= disaster

  {grandeur}               =gran'deur= of the mountains

  {osmosis}                =os-mo'sis= in chemistry

  {occasional}             =oc-ca'sion-al= showers

  {porous}                 =por'ous= filtering cup

  {journalizing}           =jour'nal-i-zing= in bookkeeping

  {peninsula}              =pen-in'su-la= of Florida

  {projection}             =pro-jec'tion= of a stairway

  {independence}           =in-de-pend'ence= of America

  {indispensable}          =in-dis-pen'sa-ble= tool

  {itself}                 =it-self'= alone

  {separator}              =sep'a-ra-tor= for cream

  {seceded}                =se-ced'ed= from the union

  {gnashing}               =gnash'ing= his teeth

  {sphere}                 =sphere= on which we live

  {spherical}              =spher'ic-al= in shape

  {square}                 =square= wooden box

  {statement}              =state'ment= of facts

  {stooped}                =stooped= to pick it up

  {stretch}                =stretch= the rubber


LESSON 39

  {subtrahend}             =sub'tra-hend= to be subtracted

  {suspicious}             =sus-pi'cious= character

  {competent}              =com'pe-tent= workman

  {chocolate}              =choc'o-late= candy

  {crisis}                 =cri'sis= of the war

  {conquer}                =con'quer= the enemy

  {circle}                 =cir'cle= around the moon

  {center}                 =cen'ter= of gravity

  {assassinate}            =as-sas'sin-ate= the tyrant

  {attorney}               =at-tor'ney= for the defense

  {avoirdupois}            =av-oir-du-pois'= weight

  {autumn}                 =au'tumn= leaves

  {disciple}               =dis-ci'ple= of Christ

  {diameter}               =di-am'e-ter= of a circle

  {divisor}                =di-vi'sor= of the number

  {diamond}                =di'a-mond= ring

  {deposit}                =de-pos'it= the money

  {decisive}               =de-ci'sive= battle

  {energy}                 =en'er-gy= from the sun's heat

  {essay}                  =es'say= by Emerson

  {every}                  =eve'ry= child likes candy

  {warrant}                =war'rant= for his arrest

  {wield}                  =wield= the weapon

  {verified}               =ver'i-fied= the answer

  {yield}                  =yield= not to temptation


LESSON 40

  {alliteration}           =al-lit-er-a'tion= in the poem

  {acceleration}           =ac-cel-er-a'tion= of the speed

  {accidentally}           =ac-ci-den'tal-ly= injured

  {accrued}                =ac-crued'= interest

  {apartment}              =a-part'ment= house

  {apparel}                =ap-par'el= for wearing

  {approach}               =ap-proach'= of the enemy

  {acoustics}              =a-cous'tics= of the hall

  {advisable}              =ad-vis'a-ble= to be careful

  {brigadier}              =brig-a-dier'= general

  {bulletin}               =bul'le-tin= board

  {blamable}               =bla'ma-ble= for the accident

  {bilious}                =bil'ious= fever

  {boulder}                =boul'der= in the field

  {bolder}                 =bold'er= than a lion

  {chemical}               =chem'i-cal= reaction

  {customary}              =cus'tom-a-ry= ceremony

  {centrifugal}            =cen-trif'u-gal= force

  {cancelation}            =can-cel-a'tion= of the debt

  {courtier}               =court'ier= of King James

  {congruent}              =con'gru-ent= parts

  {curiosity}              =cu-ri-os'i-ty= shop

  {complimentary}          =com-pli-men'ta-ry= remark

  {complementary}          =com-ple-men'ta-ry= angles

  {constitutional}         =con-sti-tu'tion-al= government


LESSON 41

  {condensing}             =con-dens'ing= the milk

  {conceived}              =con-ceived'= the plan

  {commit}                 =com-mit'= a crime

  {deficiency}             =de-fi'cien-cy= in his studies

  {decorated}              =dec'o-ra-ted= the building

  {definitely}             =def'i-nite-ly= understood

  {demonstrative}          =de-mon'stra-tive= pronoun

  {dependence}             =de-pend'ence= on others

  {dependents}             =de-pend'ents= of the estate

  {depository}             =de-pos'i-to-ry= for goods

  {expedition}             =ex-pe-di'tion= to the North Pole

  {esophagus}  }           =e-soph'a-gus= leads to the stomach
  {oesophagus} }

  {equilibrant}            =e-qui-li'brant= forces

  {elasticity}             =el-as-tic'i-ty= of rubber

  {electoral}              =e-lec'tor-al= vote

  {endeavor}               =en-deav'or= to do good

  {indorsement} }          =in-dorse'ment= of the note
  {endorsement} }

  {edible}                 =ed'i-ble= mushroom

  {entry}                  =en'try= in the books

  {entries}                =en'tries= in the books

  {explanation}            =ex-pla-na'tion= of the meaning

  {extraordinary}          =ex-traor'di-na-ry= circumstances

  {extremely}              =ex-treme'ly= beautiful


LESSON 42

  {enough}                 =e-nough'= money to buy it

  {envelope}               =en'vel-ope= was sealed

  {envelop}                =en-vel'op= with a wrapper

  {faucet}                 =fau'cet= for cold water

  {facet}                  =fac'et= cut on the diamond

  {fuchsia}                =fuch'sia= growing in the garden

  {fatigue}                =fa-tigue'= after a long walk

  {guaranty}               =guar'an-ty= bond

  {hyperbole}              =hy-per'bo-le= of speech

  {handkerchief}           =hand'ker-chief= in his pocket

  {invisible}              =in-vis'i-ble= enemy

  {infallible}             =in-fal'li-ble= judgment

  {immigration}            =im-mi-gra'tion= into America

  {emigration}             =em-i-gra'tion= from Germany

  {irresistible}           =ir-re-sist'i-ble= force

  {friction}               =fric'tion= of the wheels

  {foundry}                =foun'dry= for making boilers

  {judiciary}              =ju-di'ci-a-ry= powers

  {legislature}            =leg'is-la-ture= of the state

  {lodgment}               =lodg'ment= of a complaint

  {length}                 =length= of the cloth

  {meridian}               =me-rid'i-an= of Greenwich

  {malleable}              =mal'le-a-ble= metal

  {maritime}               =mar'i-time= city

  {hypocrisy}              =hy-poc'ri-sy= of the faker


LESSON 43

  {monkeys}                =mon'keys= in the cage

  {moraine}                =mo-raine'= formed by a glacier

  {neutral}                =neu'tral= country

  {valid}                  =val'id= excuse

  {seizing}                =seiz'ing= the opportunity

  {sculpture}              =sculp'ture= in the art museum

  {sculptor}               =sculp'tor= of the statue

  {scalene}                =sca-lene'= triangle

  {sensitive}              =sen'si-tive= nerve

  {sensible}               =sen'si-ble= remark

  {reciprocity}            =rec-i-proc'i-ty= with Canada

  {respiratory}            =re-spir'a-to-ry= organs

  {philosopher}            =phi-los'o-pher= Plato

  {philosophy}             =phi-los'o-phy= of Socrates

  {melon}                  =mel'on= growing on a vine

  {pronounceable}          =pro-nounce'a-ble= word

  {peaceably}              =peace'a-bly= resting

  {peculiarly}             =pe-cul'iar-ly= arranged

  {permissible}            =per-mis'si-ble= action

  {propitious}             =pro-pi'tious= circumstances

  {possibility}            =pos-si-bil'i-ty= of success

  {postulate}              =pos'tu-late= needs no proof

  {alphabet}               =al'pha-bet= of 26 letters

  {ambitious}              =am-bi'tious= young man

  {ancestors}              =an'ces-tors= of noble birth


LESSON 44

  {capacity}               =ca-pac'i-ty= of the car

  {lacquered}              =lac'quered= box from Japan

  {consecutive}            =con-sec'u-tive= numbers

  {competitor}             =com-pet'i-tor= in business

  {crustacea}              =crus-ta'ce-a= include lobsters

  {chronicle}              =chron'i-cle= of events

  {environment}            =en-vi'ron-ment= of the child

  {epitaph}                =ep'i-taph= on the tomb

  {equipped}               =e-quipped'= for the voyage

  {essence}                =es'sence= of lemon

  {exaggeration}           =ex-ag-ger-a'tion= of the truth

  {excitement}             =ex-cite'ment= of the game

  {icicle}                 =i'ci-cle= hanging on the eaves

  {indorse}                =in-dorse'= the note

  {imminent}               =im'mi-nent= danger

  {identical}              =i-den'ti-cal= results

  {infinite}               =in'fi-nite= time and space

  {motor}                  =mo'tor= boat on the river

  {mountain}               =moun'tain= peak

  {multiple}               =mul'ti-ple= of the number

  {temperament}            =tem'per-a-ment= of the artist

  {transferring}           =trans-fer'ring= the baggage

  {trapezium}              =tra-pe'zi-um= has four sides

  {treacherous}            =treach'er-ous= wild beasts

  {treachery}              =treach'er-y= of his friend


LESSON 45

  {tonnage}                =ton'nage= of the boat

  {stratagem}              =strat'a-gem= of the general

  {superstition}           =su-per-sti'tion= of the ignorant

  {souvenir}               =sou-ve-nir'= of the occasion

  {separable}              =sep'a-ra-ble= parts

  {preceded}               =pre-ce'ded= by an escort

  {permanent}              =per'ma-nent= fixture

  {pertain}                =per-tain'= to youth

  {potassium}              =po-tas'si-um= is an element

  {porcelain}              =porce'lain= dish

  {pioneer}                =pi-o-neer'= of America

  {plateau}                =pla-teau'= of Colorado

  {annihilated}            =an-ni'hi-la-ted= by the enemy

  {amenable}               =a-me'na-ble= to reason

  {artisans}               =ar'ti-sans= did the work

  {ascertain}              =as-cer-tain'= his meaning

  {assistant}              =as-sist'ant= of the superintendent

  {conversely}             =con-verse'ly= stated

  {confectionery}          =con-fec'tion-er-y= shop

  {coastal}                =coast'al= plain of California

  {colonization}           =col-o-ni-za'tion= of America

  {censure}                =cen'sure= the bad boy

  {censor}                 =cen'sor= of the news

  {chieftain}              =chief'tain= of the tribe

  {despise}                =de-spise'= a falsehood


LESSON 46

  {excommunication}        =ex-com-mu-ni-ca'tion= by the Pope

  {exhort}                 =ex-hort'= the mob

  {expect}                 =ex-pect'= to be elected

  {infinity}               =in-fin'i-ty= of space and time

  {mutiny}                 =mu'ti-ny= of the sailors

  {mutually}               =mu'tu-al-ly= agreeable

  {mysterious}             =mys-te'ri-ous= stranger

  {turbine}                =tur'bine= engine

  {typewriter}             =type'wri-ter= for business letters

  {trigonometry}           =trig-o-nom'e-try= used in surveying

  {technical}              =tech'ni-cal= school

  {separately}             =sep'a-rate-ly= packed

  {strength}               =strength= of a giant

  {solder}                 =sold'er= the tin kettle

  {soldier}                =sol'dier= of the army

  {subjunctive}            =sub-junc'tive= mode

  {substitution}           =sub-sti-tu'tion= of a poorer quality

  {responsible}            =re-spon'si-ble= for the accident

  {receipted}              =re-ceipt'ed= the bill

  {receiver}               =re-ceiv'er= for the company

  {pleasure}               =pleas'ure= of skating

  {plural}                 =plu'ral= noun

  {assume}                 =as-sume'= the responsibility

  {authority}              =au-thor'i-ty= of the law

  {awkward}                =awk'ward= and bashful lad


LESSON 47

  {axillary}               =ax'il-la-ry= bud

  {alien}                  =a'lien= residents

  {abridgment}             =a-bridg'ment= of the dictionary

  {abundance}              =a-bun'dance= of hair

  {abyss}                  =a-byss'= was deep

  {accessible}             =ac-ces'si-ble= place

  {bouquet}                =bou-quet'= of flowers

  {burglar}                =bur'glar= robbed the house

  {busily}                 =bus'i-ly= engaged in work

  {begin}                  =be-gin'= to move faster

  {bear}                   =bear= the burden (_also_ animal)

  {bare}                   =bare= hands and feet

  {conjugation}            =con-ju-ga'tion= of a verb

  {controlled}             =con-trolled'= the company

  {cathedral}              =ca-the'dral= at Milan

  {climbed}                =climbed= the stairs

  {compromise}             =com'pro-mise= the dispute

  {continue}               =con-tin'ue= the quarrel

  {corresponding}          =cor-re-spond'ing= with him

  {corporation}            =cor-po-ra'tion= laws

  {cotton}                 =cot'ton= from Texas

  {circular}               =cir'cu-lar= saw

  {cipher}                 =ci'pher= the problem

  {carriage}               =car'riage= for hire

  {consensus}              =con-sen'sus= of opinion


LESSON 48

  {codicil}                =cod'i-cil= to the will

  {dilemma}                =di-lem'ma= of the culprit

  {direct}                 =di-rect'= communication

  {dissension}             =dis-sen'sion= in the party

  {divine}                 =di-vine'= power

  {dose}                   =dose= of medicine

  {dubious}                =du'bi-ous= as to the result

  {decimal}                =dec'i-mal= fractions

  {debt}                   =debt= was paid

  {elephant}               =el'e-phant= hunt in Africa

  {expel}                  =ex-pel'= the pupil

  {effective}              =ef-fec'tive= laws

  {easement}               =ease'ment= of the pain

  {enclose} }              =en-close'= a dollar bill
  {inclose} }

  {erosion}                =e-ro'sion= of the rocks

  {eraser}                 =e-ra'ser= on a pencil

  {error}                  =er'ror= in the figuring

  {euphony}                =eu'pho-ny= of the language

  {employment}             =em-ploy'ment= agency

  {fertilize}              =fer'til-ize= the soil

  {financier}              =fin-an-cier'= in Wall Street

  {forfeit}                =for'feit= the money

  {foreigner}              =for'eign-er= just landed

  {franchise}              =fran'chise= for women


LESSON 49

  {fumigate}               =fu'mi-gate= the sick-room

  {formally}               =for'mal-ly= announced

  {fierce}                 =fierce= lions and tigers

  {gymnasium}              =gym-na'si-um= exercise

  {glacier}                =glac'i-er= on the coast of Alaska

  {geography}              =ge-og'ra-phy= lesson

  {group}                  =group= of children

  {harass}                 =har'ass= the captive

  {hexagon}                =hex'a-gon= has six sides

  {haven't}                =have'n't= you gone

  {honor}                  =hon'or= of a gentleman

  {hoped}                  =hoped= all was well

  {hopped}                 =hopped= like a toad

  {hundredth}              =hun'dredth= part of an inch

  {humorous}               =hu'mor-ous= remark

  {hurrying}               =hur'ry-ing= to catch the train

  {heresy}                 =her'e-sy= among the Lollards

  {inflammable}            =in-flam'ma-ble= material

  {initiate}               =in-i'ti-ate= the candidate

  {initials}               =in-i'tials= of his name

  {instructor}             =in-struct'or= of mathematics

  {interference}           =in-ter-fer'ence= of his friend

  {inversely}              =in-verse'ly= proportional

  {itemize}                =i'tem-ize= the account

  {labeled}                =la'beled= the bottles


LESSON 50

  {materially}             =ma-te'ri-al-ly= changed

  {mechanics}              =me-chan'ics= in the factory

  {memorandum}             =mem-o-ran'dum= of engagements

  {metamorphosis}          =met-a-mor'pho-sis= of the butterfly

  {militia}                =mi-li'tia= of the state

  {millinery}              =mil'li-ner-y= department

  {mackerel}               =mack'er-el= fishing

  {manufacturing}          =man-u-fac'tur-ing= shoes

  {nomination}             =nom-i-na'tion= of the president

  {noticing}               =no'tic-ing= details

  {notion}                 =no'tion= in her head

  {grotesque}              =gro-tesque'= appearance

  {organization}           =or-gan-i-za'tion= of a society

  {oxidize}                =ox'i-dize= the metal

  {obedience}              =o-be'di-ence= of the child

  {opinion}                =o-pin'ion= on the subject

  {offered}                =of'fered= his arm

  {only}                   =on'ly= one remained

  {wealthy}                =wealth'y= capitalist

  {witch}                  =witch= in the fairy tale

  {humidity}               =hu-mid'i-ty= of the atmosphere

  {woolly}                 =wool'ly= lamb

  {vicinity}               =vi-cin'i-ty= of the park

  {vicissitude}            =vi-cis'si-tude= of the explorer

  {vitriol}                =vit'ri-ol= burns like fire


LESSON 51

  {voice}                  =voice= of the singer

  {volcano}                =vol-ca'no= in eruption

  {volcanoes}              =vol-ca'noes= of the Pacific coast

  {volume}                 =vol'ume= of the tank

  {poison}                 =poi'son= the rat

  {policy}                 =pol'i-cy= of the party

  {prepare}                =pre-pare'= for war

  {preposition}            =prep-o-si'tion= and its object

  {primer}                 =prim'er= of the language

  {prism}                  =prism= of glass

  {process}                =proc'ess= of making steel

  {pavilion}               =pa-vil'ion= for a band concert

  {percussion}             =per-cus'sion= of the blow

  {porch}                  =porch= on the house

  {relative}               =rel'a-tive= pronoun

  {relieved}               =re-lieved'= of his pain

  {reefer}                 =reef'er= to wear in winter

  {subtle}                 =sub'tle= remark

  {subtraction}            =sub-trac'tion= of the numbers

  {sugar}                  =sug'ar= is sweet

  {summary}                =sum'ma-ry= of the chapter

  {statue}                 =stat'ue= of Liberty

  {statute}                =stat'ute= of the commonwealth

  {special}                =spe'cial= permission

  {solutions}              =so-lu'tions= of the problems


LESSON 52

  {sketch}                 =sketch= the beautiful scene

  {shipped}                =shipped= the goods

  {shriek}                 =shriek= of the wounded

  {shown}                  =shown= the sights of the city

  {serge}                  =serge= cloth for a suit

  {surge}                  =surge= of the waves

  {servant}                =ser'vant= in the house

  {superpose}              =su-per-pose'= the triangle

  {sector}                 =sec'tor= of the angle

  {trachea}                =tra'che-a= duct into the lungs

  {transversal}            =trans-ver'sal= line

  {temporary}              =tem'po-ra-ry= building

  {tendency}               =ten'den-cy= of the times

  {tomato}                 =to-ma'to= catsup

  {trough}                 =trough= of water

  {tenant}                 =ten'ant= of the estate

  {thought}                =thought= he could spell

  {treasure}               =treas'ure= in the sunken ship

  {unanimous}              =u-nan'i-mous= consent

  {using}                  =us'ing= good English

  {anhydrous}              =an-hy'drous= substances have no water

  {aborigines}             =ab-o-rig'i-nes= of America

  {argument}               =ar'gu-ment= of the lawyer

  {ascent}                 =as-cent'= of the mountain

  {anxiety}                =anx-i'e-ty= of the mother


LESSON 53

  {absolute}               =ab'so-lute= truth

  {acetylene}              =a-cet'yl-ene= gas-light

  {crucifixion}            =cru-ci-fix'ion= of Christ

  {colossal}               =co-los'sal= structure

  {cylindrical}            =cy-lin'dri-cal= tank

  {courageous}             =cou-ra'geous= fireman

  {cotyledon}              =cot-y-le'don= of the plant

  {dactylic}               =dac-tyl'ic= meter of verse

  {diffusion}              =dif-fu'sion= of sunlight

  {erysipelas}             =er-y-sip'e-las= proved fatal

  {extravagance}           =ex-trav'a-gance= of the rich

  {facsimile}              =fac-sim'i-le= of the signature

  {familiarly}             =fa-mil'iar-ly= known to him

  {gradually}              =grad'u-al-ly= the rock wore away

  {generous}               =gen'er-ous= gift

  {geranium}               =ge-ra'ni-um= in the garden

  {gesture}                =ges'ture= of the speaker

  {hypocrite}              =hyp'o-crite= in the church

  {itinerant}              =i-tin'er-ant= preacher

  {intellectual}           =in-tel-lec'tu-al= person

  {irreparable}            =ir-rep'a-ra-ble= loss

  {instalment}             =in-stal'ment= of the machine

  {indict}                 =in-dict'= the man for murder

  {inauguration}           =in-au-gu-ra'tion= of Wilson

  {reimburse}              =re-im-burse'= his expenses


LESSON 54

  {inevitable}             =in-ev'i-ta-ble= result

  {ignorance}              =ig'no-rance= of the subject

  {longitudinal}           =lon-gi-tu'di-nal= lines

  {marvelous}              =mar'vel-ous= escape

  {maintain}               =main-tain'= a large establishment

  {mortise}                =mor'tise= the boards

  {perseverance}           =per-se-ver'ance= of the inventor

  {phenomena}              =phe-nom'e-na= of lightning

  {propagation}            =prop-a-ga'tion= of the species

  {polyhedral}             =pol-y-he'dral= figures in geometry

  {rectilinear}            =rec-ti-lin'e-ar= lines

  {rhetorical}             =rhe-tor'i-cal= speech

  {rationalization} }      =ra-tion-al-i-za'tion= of the equation
  {rationalisation} }

  {rheumatism}             =rheu'ma-tism= in his arm

  {resuscitate}            =re-sus'ci-tate= the drowned

  {ache}                   =ache= in my tooth

  {agrarian}               =a-gra'ri-an= laws

  {apostrophe}             =a-pos'tro-phe= before the _s_

  {applied}                =ap-plied'= the brakes

  {appeal}                 =ap-peal'= the case

  {appalling}              =ap-pal'ling= spectacle

  {appositive}             =ap-pos'i-tive= phrase

  {appurtenance}           =ap-pur'te-nance= of the machine

  {approve}                =ap-prove'= his action


LESSON 55

  {corpuscle}              =cor'pus-cle= of the blood

  {continuity}             =con-ti-nu'i-ty= of his arguments

  {centigrade}             =cen'ti-grade= thermometer

  {contemptible}           =con-tempt'i-ble= behavior

  {inflammation}           =in-flam-ma'tion= of the wound

  {colonies}               =col'o-nies= of Great Britain

  {contemporaneous}        =con-tem-po-ra'ne-ous= authors

  {feign}                  =feign= or pretend sleep

  {fertilizing}            =fer'til-iz-ing= the soil

  {fief}                   =fief= of feudal days

  {hypnotize}              =hyp'no-tize= the man

  {illegal}                =il-le'gal= sale of liquor

  {evacuate}               =e-vac'u-ate= the fort

  {immersed}               =im-mersed'= the convert

  {industrial}             =in-dus'tri-al= center

  {intelligent}            =in-tel'li-gent= man

  {inertia}                =in-er'tia= of the mass

  {influence}              =in'flu-ence= of a mother

  {lease}                  =lease= the house

  {mandible}               =man'di-ble= of the crawfish

  {moccasin}               =moc'ca-sin= worn by the Indian

  {preference}             =pref'er-ence= for money

  {preliminary}            =pre-lim'i-na-ry= examination

  {pleurisy}               =pleu'ri-sy= is a disease

  {percolator}             =per'co-la-tor= for making coffee


LESSON 56

  {nonchalant}             =non'cha-lant= manner

  {piercing}               =pier'cing= shriek

  {pollination}            =pol-li-na'tion= of the flowers

  {personification}        =per-son-i-fi-ca'tion= of the sun

  {precipice}              =prec'i-pice= of rock

  {primitive}              =prim'i-tive= man

  {prestige}               =pres-tige'= of high position

  {possessor}              =pos-sess'or= of a large fortune

  {punctuation}            =punc-tu-a'tion= of a sentence

  {palette}                =pal'ette= for the artist's paints

  {palate}                 =pal'ate back= of the tongue

  {practiced}              =prac'ticed= his lesson

  {vinculum}               =vin'cu-lum= over the numbers

  {veterinary}             =vet'er-i-na-ry= surgeon

  {resonance}              =res'o-nance= of the organ

  {revenue}                =rev'e-nue= stamps

  {reverence}              =rev'er-ence= for old age

  {reversible}             =re-vers'i-ble= cuffs

  {rescind}                =re-scind'= the order

  {requirement}            =re-quire'ment= for entrance

  {radiate}                =ra'di-ate= the heat

  {relatively}             =rel'a-tive-ly= speaking

  {relevant}               =rel'e-vant= to the subject

  {pharynx}                =phar'ynx=, part of alimentary canal

  {reinforced}             =re-in-forced'= concrete


LESSON 57

  {tyrannical}             =ty-ran'ni-cal= government

  {technically}            =tech'ni-cal-ly= speaking

  {trinomial}              =tri-no'mi-al= equation

  {trousseau}              =trous-seau'= for the bride

  {systematically}         =sys-tem-at'ic-al-ly= arranged

  {synthetic}              =syn-thet'ic= rubies made in France

  {syndicate}              =syn'di-cate= with large capital

  {synthesis}              =syn'the-sis= is combination

  {suburbs}                =sub'urbs= of the city

  {substitute}             =sub'sti-tute= for the original

  {stimulus}               =stim'u-lus= to work

  {parliamentary}          =par-lia-men'ta-ry= law

  {proprietary}            =pro-pri'et-a-ry= rights

  {solecisms}              =sol'e-cisms= of speech

  {soliloquy}              =so-lil'o-quy= of Hamlet

  {silhouette}             =sil-hou-ette'= against the screen

  {scientific}             =sci-en-tif'ic= treatment

  {symbols}                =sym'bols= used in chemistry

  {accede}                 =ac-cede'= to our request

  {accessory}              =ac-ces'so-ry= before the fact

  {accident}               =ac'ci-dent= on the railroad

  {accomplish}             =ac-com'plish= his purpose

  {consummate}             =con-sum'mate= his desire

  {conspiracy}             =con-spir'a-cy= against the king

  {concurrent}             =con-cur'rent= with the event


LESSON 58

  {concession}             =con-ces'sion= of the government

  {committal}              =com-mit'tal= to jail

  {commerce}               =com'merce= between nations

  {colleague}              =col'league= in the faculty

  {collector}              =col-lec'tor= of bills

  {dissociation}           =dis-so-ci-a'tion= of ideas

  {divisibility}           =di-vis-i-bil'i-ty= of the number

  {deceased}               =de-ceased'= husband

  {decomposition}          =de-com-po-si'tion= of matter

  {encyclopedia}           =en-cy-clo-pe'di-a= Britannica

  {exhilarate}             =ex-hil'a-rate= or enliven

  {enforceable}            =en-force'a-ble= by law

  {electrolytic}           =e-lec-tro-lyt'ic= apparatus

  {ingredients}            =in-gre'di-ents= of the mixture

  {initiative}             =in-i'ti-a-tive= and referendum

  {insurrection}           =in-sur-rec'tion= of the natives

  {intersection}           =in-ter-sec'tion= of the lines

  {irrigation}             =ir-ri-ga'tion= of the desert

  {irascible}              =i-ras'ci-ble= disposition

  {martial}                =mar'tial= music

  {moreover}               =more-o'ver= we must go

  {minutiae}               =mi-nu'ti-ae= of little consequence

  {metallurgy}             =met'al-lur-gy= studied in college

  {mentally}               =men'tal-ly= deficient

  {changing}               =chang'ing= her dress


LESSON 59

  {modern}                 =mod'ern= fashions

  {possible}               =pos'si-ble= to do it

  {poplar}                 =pop'lar= tree

  {popular}                =pop'u-lar= song

  {political}              =po-lit'i-cal= speech

  {peculiarity}            =pe-cu-li-ar'i-ty= of the man

  {papacy}                 =pa'pa-cy= at Rome

  {paging}                 =pag'ing= the book

  {physics}                =phys'ics= studied in school

  {ruffian}                =ruf'fi-an= attacked him

  {rectangle}              =rect'an-gle= is a quadrilateral

  {sandwiches}             =sand'wich-es= made of ham

  {sacrilegious}           =sac-ri-le'gious= speech

  {sacrilege}              =sac'ri-lege= against the church

  {sincere}                =sin-cere'= friend

  {scheme}                 =scheme= to make money

  {accustomed}             =ac-cus'tomed= to hard work

  {allegory}               =al'le-go-ry= of "Pilgrim's Progress"

  {allowed}                =al-lowed'= him his expenses

  {ally}                   =al-ly'= of the English

  {assassin}               =as-sas'sin= of McKinley

  {assault}                =as-sault'= and battery

  {ambassador}             =am-bas'sa-dor= to France

  {attention}              =at-ten'tion= to the lesson

  {aluminum}               =a-lu'mi-num= cooking utensils


LESSON 60

  {acquisition}            =ac-qui-si'tion= of the property

  {pasteurized}            =pas'teur-ized= milk

  {coercion}               =co-er'cion= by the Powers

  {classicism}             =clas'si-cism= of the poet

  {chivalry}               =chiv'al-ry= of the knight

  {chiffonier}             =chif-fo-nier'= made of oak

  {chaperon}               =chap'er-on= the young couple

  {modal}                  =mo'dal= form of verb

  {model}                  =mod'el= of the machine

  {catastrophe}            =cat-as'tro-phe= on the railroad

  {cashmere}               =cash'mere= dress

  {celery}                 =cel'er-y= for dinner

  {catarrh}                =ca-tarrh'= of the throat

  {determine}              =de-ter'mine= his meaning

  {discourage}             =dis-cour'age= his efforts

  {diagramming}            =di'a-gram-ming= the sentence

  {isolated}               =is'o-la-ted= on an island

  {lessee}                 =les-see'= paid his rent

  {legend}                 =leg'end= of "Sleepy Hollow"

  {legion}                 =le'gion= of soldiers

  {league}                 =league= of baseball teams

  {moisture}               =mois'ture= in the atmosphere

  {molecules}              =mol'e-cules= of elements

  {monarchy}               =mon'arch-y= ruled by a king

  {machine}                =ma-chine'= for making shoes


LESSON 61

  {persecuted}             =per'se-cu-ted= the Christians

  {pieces}                 =pie'ces= of glass

  {poured}                 =poured= the water

  {picture}                =pic'ture= of his home

  {precise}                =pre-cise'= moment

  {piazza}                 =pi-az'za= of the house

  {petroleum}              =pe-tro'le-um= cream

  {patriotic}              =pa-tri-ot'ic= citizen

  {swords}                 =swords= for fighting

  {sacrifice}              =sac'ri-fice= his honor

  {salmon}                 =salm'on= from the river

  {salve}                  =salve= on the wound

  {sapphire}               =sap'phire= and diamond ring

  {satisfactorily}         =sat-is-fac'to-ri-ly= explained

  {saving}                 =sav'ing= his money

  {scarred}                =scarred= in a fight for life

  {scenery}                =sce'ner-y= in Colorado

  {scholar}                =schol'ar= in the university

  {achieve}                =a-chieve'= great renown

  {annuity}                =an-nu'i-ty= paid to him

  {admitted}               =ad-mit'ted= his guilt

  {admittance}             =ad-mit'tance= to the lodge

  {acetic}                 =a-cet'ic= acid in the bottle

  {academy}                =a-cad'e-my= of science

  {accountant}             =ac-count'ant= to examine the books


LESSON 62

  {ability}                =a-bil'i-ty= of the boy

  {acute}                  =a-cute'= angle

  {beneficence}            =be-nef'i-cence= of the gentleman

  {barbarians}             =bar-ba'ri-ans= of Africa

  {cataract}               =cat'a-ract= on the eye

  {casually}               =cas'u-al-ly= dropped a hint

  {capillarity}            =cap-il-lar'i-ty= of the soil

  {calories}               =cal'or-ies= of heat

  {conduit}                =con'duit= for underground wires

  {campaigns}              =cam-paigns'= of Napoleon

  {candor}                 =can'dor= of the honest man

  {filaments}              =fil'a-ments= of silk

  {hygienic}               =hy-gi-en'ic= exercise

  {patriotism}             =pa'tri-ot-ism= of the soldier

  {performance}            =per-form'ance= of the actors

  {period}                 =pe'ri-od= after a sentence

  {patience}               =pa'tience= of the good mother

  {scythe}                 =scythe= for cutting grass

  {sigh}                   =sigh= of the weary

  {secretaries}            =sec're-tar-ies= wrote reports

  {section}                =sec'tion= of the Pullman

  {senate}                 =sen'ate= passed the bill

  {sepals}                 =sep'als= of the flower

  {liniment}               =lin'i-ment= for a sprain

  {lineament}              =lin'e-a-ment= of the face


LESSON 63

  {adaptability}           =a-dapt-a-bil'i-ty= to circumstances

  {adjective}              =adj'ec-tive= of quality

  {aeroplane}              =a'er-o-plane= accident

  {advancement}            =ad-vance'ment= to a good position

  {admire}                 =ad-mire'= the beautiful

  {albumen}                =al-bu'men= of the egg

  {caloric}                =ca-lor'ic= theory of heat

  {cellar}                 =cel'lar= under the house

  {centimeter}             =cen'ti-me-ter= in length

  {chemistry}              =chem'is-try= studied at school

  {chisel}                 =chis'el= for carpentering

  {cinnamon}               =cin'na-mon= flavor

  {circuit}                =cir'cuit= court in session

  {coincident}             =co-in'ci-dent= angles

  {collars}                =col'lars= of white linen

  {commissioner}           =com-mis'sion-er= of education

  {community}              =com-mu'ni-ty= in which he lives

  {company}                =com'pa-ny= of soldiers

  {companies}              =com'pa-nies= of soldiers

  {disappointing}          =dis-ap-point'ing= result

  {discrepancy}            =dis-crep'an-cy= in the accounts

  {element}                =el'e-ment= of danger

  {equipment}              =e-quip'ment= of the regiment

  {geyser}                 =gey'ser= in Yellowstone Park

  {hemorrhage}             =hem'or-rhage= of the lungs


LESSON 64

  {isthmus}                =isth'mus= of Panama

  {oligarchy}              =ol'i-gar-chy= in ancient Rome

  {pores}                  =pores= of the skin

  {liquefaction}           =liq-ue-fac'tion= of ice

  {vice versa}             =vice versa=, that is, turned about

  {villainy}               =vil'lain-y= of the rascal

  {recompense}             =rec'om-pense= the faithful

  {regions}                =re'gions= of perpetual snow

  {routes}                 =routes= of the travelers

  {traceable}              =trace'a-ble= lines

  {treatise}               =trea'tise= on art

  {traveler}               =trav'el-er= through Italy

  {traitor}                =trai'tor= to his country

  {transpose}              =trans-pose'= the phrase

  {several}                =sev'er-al= years ago

  {service}                =ser'vice= in the army

  {sheriff}                =sher'iff= of the county

  {shipment}               =ship'ment= of the goods

  {alkaline}               =al'ka-line= solution

  {analogous}              =a-nal'o-gous= terms

  {anarchy}                =an'arch-y= against the government

  {anoints}                =a-noints'= his head with oil

  {answer}                 =an'swer= the question

  {antiquity}              =an-tiq'ui-ty= of the relic

  {aristocrat}             =ar-is'to-crat= by birth


LESSON 65

  {ascension}              =as-cen'sion= of the balloon

  {armor}                  =ar'mor= of the knight

  {articles}               =ar'ti-cles= for sale

  {believing}              =be-liev'ing= the story

  {borough}                =bor'ough= of Manhattan

  {borrow}                 =bor'row= the money

  {barrel}                 =bar'rel= of sugar

  {compelled}              =com-pelled'= to resign

  {competition}            =com-pe-ti'tion= in business

  {completely}             =com-plete'ly= finished

  {conceit}                =con-ceit'= of the boastful

  {consequent}             =con'se-quent= result

  {consistency}            =con-sist'en-cy= of the mixture

  {contagious}             =con-ta'gious= disease

  {casualty}               =cas'u-al-ty= insurance

  {crevice}                =crev'ice= in the rock

  {covetous}               =cov'et-ous= of his wealth

  {discernment}            =dis-cern'ment= of the wise

  {dissatisfied}           =dis-sat'is-fied= with his treatment

  {dissenter}              =dis-sent'er= in the church

  {emigrate}               =em'i-grate= from America

  {immigrate}              =im'mi-grate= to America

  {following}              =fol'low-ing= the crowd

  {forbade}                =for-bade'= him to go

  {granary}                =gran'a-ry= for storing wheat


LESSON 66

  {grabbed}                =grabbed= the money

  {going}                  =go'ing= to sail

  {ghost}                  =ghost= of Hamlet

  {harmonically}           =har-mon'ic-al-ly= composed

  {irrational}             =ir-ra'tion-al= statement

  {irregular}              =ir-reg'u-lar= proceedings

  {journey}                =jour'ney= to Mexico

  {judicial}               =ju-di'cial= decree

  {manufacture}            =man-u-fac'tur-er= of guns

  {margin}                 =mar'gin= of the page

  {merry}                  =mer'ry= Christmas

  {marry}                  =mar'ry= the girl

  {married}                =mar'ried= in church

  {necessitate}            =ne-ces'si-tate= an explanation

  {octagon}                =oc'ta-gon= used in the design

  {potential}              =po-ten'tial= mode

  {predecessor}            =pred-e-ces'sor= in office

  {presbytery}             =pres'by-ter-y= in session

  {visible}                =vis'i-ble= to the naked eye

  {radius}                 =ra'di-us= of a circle

  {radii}                  =ra'di-i= of the circles

  {raisins}                =rai'sins= in the pudding

  {recent}                 =re'cent= event

  {remit}                  =re-mit'= the money

  {ferocious}              =fe-ro'cious= animal


LESSON 67

  {sine}                   =sine= in trigonometry

  {sign}                   =sign= of bad weather

  {size}                   =size= of the barrel

  {skeleton}               =skel'e-ton= of a man

  {social}                 =so'cial= gathering

  {something}              =some'thing= new

  {stamens}                =sta'mens= of the flowers

  {parasitic}              =par-a-sit'ic= plant

  {around}                 =a-round'= the world

  {audience}               =au'di-ence= with the Pope

  {auricle}                =au'ri-cle= of the heart

  {awful}                  =aw'ful= disaster

  {awfulness}              =aw'ful-ness= of the murder

  {axis}                   =ax'is= of the earth

  {axle}                   =ax'le= of the wheel

  {borne}                  =borne= on his shoulders

  {brilliant}              =bril'liant= display

  {biology}                =bi-ol'o-gy= of plants

  {bookkeeper}             =book'keep-er= in the store

  {bluing}                 =blu'ing= the clothes

  {bargain}                =bar'gain= sale of hats

  {breed}                  =breed= of chickens

  {cousin}                 =cous'in= from the country

  {census}                 =cen'sus= of the population

  {cooeperate}              =co-op'er-ate= in the work


LESSON 68

  {cyclone}                =cy'clone= cellar

  {cycle}                  =cy'cle= of years

  {cruise}                 =cruise= around the world

  {crews}                  =crews= of the vessels

  {cruelly}                =cru'el-ly= treated

  {credit}                 =cred'it= of the merchant

  {crucible}               =cru'ci-ble= for melting gold

  {contents}               =con'tents= of the bottle

  {cabinet}                =cab'i-net= officers

  {civil}                  =civ'il= government

  {central}                =cen'tral= station

  {catch}                  =catch= the fish

  {cannot}                 =can'not= tell a lie

  {comma}                  =com'ma= after the word

  {coupon}                 =cou'pon= attached to the ticket

  {copy}                   =cop'y= the words

  {copied}                 =cop'ied= the words

  {continental}            =con-ti-nen'tal= troops

  {coast}                  =coast= down the hill

  {city}                   =cit'y= of New York

  {cities}                 =cit'ies= and towns

  {citizen}                =cit'i-zen= of the United States

  {dissipate}              =dis'si-pate= a fortune

  {dividend}               =div'i-dend= paying stock

  {don't}                  =don't= smoke cigarettes


LESSON 69

  {distillate}             =dis-til'late= of the solution

  {disguised}              =dis-guised'= as a soldier

  {discovery}              =dis-cov'er-y= of America

  {duly}                   =du'ly= signed and witnessed

  {Deity}                  =De'i-ty= to whom we pray

  {dative}                 =da'tive= case

  {resurrection}           =res-ur-rec'tion= of the dead

  {endorser}               =en-dor'ser= of the note

  {enormous}               =e-nor'mous= profits

  {enthusiasm}             =en-thu'si-asm= of the students

  {enterprise}             =en'ter-prise= of the merchant

  {exterior}               =ex-te'ri-or= of the building

  {epoch}                  =ep'och= in history

  {executive}              =ex-ec'u-tive= chamber

  {earnest}                =ear'nest= request

  {forward}                =for'ward= march

  {formulae}               =for'mu-lae= for the mixtures

  {formula}                =for'mu-la= for the mixture

  {fulfilment}             =ful-fil'ment= of his promise

  {fuel}                   =fu'el= for the fire

  {further}                =fur'ther= discussion

  {farther}                =far'ther= away than Chicago

  {ghastly}                =ghast'ly= sight

  {gnat}                   =gnat= buzzing about

  {getting}                =get'ting= something for nothing


LESSON 70

  {inoculation}            =in-oc-u-la'tion= to prevent disease

  {guess}                  =guess= the number

  {gaiety}                 =gai'e-ty= of the crowd

  {haughty}                =haugh'ty= noble

  {horizontally}           =hor-i-zon'tal-ly= drawn

  {historical}             =his-tor'i-cal= collection

  {hostility}              =hos-til'i-ty= of the nations

  {hundred}                =hun'dred= dollars

  {hammer}                 =ham'mer= the nail

  {happened}               =hap'pened= by accident

  {hope}                   =hope= for the best

  {hop}                    =hop= on one foot

  {heroes}                 =he'roes= of the war

  {graph}                  =graph= of the population

  {insolvency}             =in-solv'en-cy= of the bank

  {inventories}            =in'ven-tor-ies= of the supplies

  {investment}             =in-vest'ment= of the money

  {introduce}              =in-tro-duce'= the speaker

  {interfered}             =in-ter-fered'= with his progress

  {intolerable}            =in-tol'er-a-ble= heat

  {intercede}              =in-ter-cede'= for him

  {instead}                =in-stead'= of playing, work

  {inserted}               =in-sert'ed= in the socket

  {innocent}               =in'no-cent= child

  {indictment}             =in-dict'ment= for murder


LESSON 71

  {indeterminate}          =in-de-ter'mi-nate= sentence

  {incumbrance}            =in-cum'brance= of old debts

  {incentive}              =in-cen'tive= to work

  {juicy}                  =jui'cy= fruit

  {kinetic}                =ki-net'ic= energy

  {knock}                  =knock= at the door

  {lens}                   =lens= of the microscope

  {lettuce}                =let'tuce= salad

  {lovable}                =lov'a-ble= child

  {lonely}                 =lone'ly= farmhouse

  {liter}                  =li'ter= of water

  {lever}                  =lev'er= of the machine

  {likely}                 =like'ly= to happen

  {laugh}                  =laugh= at the joke

  {manufactories}          =man-u-fac'to-ries= of the city

  {medicine}               =med'i-cine= to cure him

  {medicinal}              =me-dic'i-nal= virtues

  {medium}                 =me'di-um= sized bear

  {metallic}               =met-al'lic= ring

  {mountainous}            =moun'tain-ous= country

  {mosquito}               =mos-qui'to= bites

  {molecular}              =mo-lec'u-lar= theory

  {moustache}              =mous-tache'= was shaved off

  {much}                   =much= ado about nothing

  {prize}                  =prize= for spelling


LESSON 72

  {muscle}                 =mus'cle= of the arm

  {mussel}                 =mus'sel= on the seashore

  {muzzle}                 =muz'zle= the dog

  {mustard}                =mus'tard= plaster

  {neutralize}             =neu'tral-ize= the solution

  {nutrients}              =nu'tri-ents= in food

  {narration}              =nar-ra'tion= of the story

  {noun}                   =noun= is a part of speech

  {nectar}                 =nec'tar= of the gods

  {neighbor}               =neigh'bor= of mine

  {obstacle}               =ob'sta-cle= in his path

  {optician}               =op-ti'cian= examined her eyes

  {opaque}                 =o-paque'= glass window

  {optional}               =op'tion-al= course of study

  {orchid}                 =or'chid= of rare beauty

  {organize}               =or'gan-ize= a society

  {oracle}                 =or'a-cle= at Delphi

  {obliging}               =ob-li'ging= errand boy

  {omitting}               =o-mit'ting= the useless words

  {o'clock}                =o'-clock'= is a contraction

  {putting}                =put'ting= it away

  {pursuit}                =pur-suit'= of pleasure

  {pursuant}               =pur-su'ant= with the idea

  {profitable}             =prof'it-a-ble= business

  {participate}            =par-tic'i-pate= in the event


LESSON 73

  {pretension}             =pre-ten'sion= of the snob

  {pretentious}            =pre-ten'tious= people

  {preterit}               =pret'er-it= form of the verb

  {prevail}                =pre-vail'= against him

  {prevalence}             =prev'a-lence= of the disease

  {prevalent}              =prev'a-lent= idea

  {prevent}                =pre-vent'= him from going

  {primary}                =pri'ma-ry= grade

  {parcel}                 =par'cel= post

  {stirring}               =stir'ring= the soup

  {submitted}              =sub-mit'ted= his paper

  {suggestion}             =sug-ges'tion= for improvement

  {surd}                   =surd= or irrational number

  {omelet}                 =om'e-let= for breakfast

  {penitentiary}           =pen-i-ten'tia-ry= sentence

  {surprising}             =sur-pris'ing= results

  {surrender}              =sur-ren'der= to the enemy

  {sympathy}               =sym'pa-thy= for the helpless

  {usury}                  =u'su-ry= is unlawful

  {usurpation}             =u-sur-pa'tion= of the throne

  {usage}                  =us'age= of the word

  {useful}                 =use'ful= articles

  {usefulness}             =use'ful-ness= of a typewriter

  {zooelogy}                =zo-ol'o-gy= examination

  {triangle}               =tri'an-gle= with equal sides


LESSON 74

  {ventricles}             =ven'tri-cles= of the heart

  {wrought}                =wrought= iron

  {yeoman}                 =yeo'man= of England

  {bacteriology}           =bac-te-ri-ol'o-gy= is a science

  {barometric}             =bar-o-met'ric= pressure

  {barbarisms}             =bar'ba-risms= of the uncultured

  {deceitful}              =de-ceit'ful= pretender

  {deception}              =de-cep'tion= of the ventriloquist

  {declamation}            =dec-la-ma'tion= on Lincoln

  {exchangeable}           =ex-change'a-ble= goods

  {etiquette}              =et'i-quette= of the table

  {illiterate}             =il-lit'er-ate= immigrant

  {jurisdiction}           =ju-ris-dic'tion= of the court

  {kilogram}               =kil'o-gram= in weight

  {infantry}               =in'fan-try= of the army

  {achromatic}             =ach-ro-mat'ic= lens

  {asceticism}             =as-cet'i-cism= of the hermit

  {abstruse}               =ab-struse'= idea

  {aberration}             =ab-er-ra'tion= of the mind

  {biennial}               =bi-en'ni-al= plant

  {bacillus}               =ba-cil'lus= of disease

  {commencing}             =com-men'cing= to rain

  {commodities}            =com-mod'i-ties= for sale

  {debut}                  =de-but'= of the girl

  {debris}                 =de-bris'= of the wreck


LESSON 75

  {tuition}                =tu-i'tion= paid in advance

  {templar}                =tem'plar= of the 12th century

  {theory}                 =the'o-ry= and practice

  {tragic}                 =trag'ic= death

  {tacit}                  =tac'it= understanding

  {tough}                  =tough= steak

  {title}                  =ti'tle= of nobility

  {thirst}                 =thirst= for knowledge

  {temperance}             =tem'per-ance= lecture

  {temperate}              =tem'per-ate= habits

  {quorum}                 =quo'rum= of senators

  {renown}                 =re-nown'= of the great man

  {referee}                =ref-er-ee'= the game

  {repel}                  =re-pel'= the attack

  {vowel}                  =vow'el= in the word

  {valence}                =va'lence= of the element

  {valise}                 =va-lise'= packed with clothes

  {variables}              =va'ri-a-bles= approach a limit

  {waiting}                =wait'ing= at the church

  {width}                  =width= of the room

  {woolen}                 =wool'en= goods

  {wrap}                   =wrap= up the bundle

  {rap}                    =rap= at the door

  {varying}                =va'ry-ing= in depth

  {velocity}               =ve-loc'i-ty= of the bullet


LESSON 76

  {duel}                   =du'el= with swords

  {dual}                   =du'al= personality

  {dairy}                  =dai'ry= farm in Vermont

  {diary}                  =di'a-ry= of Samuel Pepys

  {canvass}                =can'vass= for votes

  {canvas}                 =can'vas= circus tent

  {coal}                   =coal= for the furnace

  {choir}                  =choir= rehearsal

  {quire}                  =quire= of paper

  {berth}                  =berth= in a sleeping car

  {birth}                  =birth= of Christ

  {been}                   =been= away from home

  {bin}                    =bin= full of coal

  {berrying}               =ber'ry-ing= in the pasture

  {burying}                =bur'y-ing= the dead

  {blew}                   =blew= a hurricane

  {blue}                   =blue= ethereal sky

  {boar}                   =boar= hunt in the forest

  {bore}                   =bore= of a rifle

  {bullion}                =bul'lion= for coinage

  {bouillon}               =bouil'lon= served in cups

  {aught}                  =aught= against his honor

  {ought}                  =ought= not to go

  {son}                    =son= of his father

  {sun}                    =sun= sets to rise again


LESSON 77

  {psychological}          =psy-cho-log'i-cal= moment

  {rhythmical}             =rhyth'mi-cal= swing

  {subpoena}               =sub-p[oe]'na= the witness

  {sixtieth}               =six'ti-eth= second

  {strategic}              =stra-teg'ic= position

  {sociability}            =so-cia-bil'i-ty= of the hostess

  {strychnine}             =strych'nine= for rats

  {sobriquet}              =so-bri-quet'= of our friend

  {thorax}                 =tho'rax= of the insect

  {threaten}               =threat'en= his life

  {tissue}                 =tis'sue= paper

  {unchangeable}           =un-change'a-ble= laws of nature

  {umbrella}               =um-brel'la= turned inside out

  {valiant}                =val'iant= soldier

  {wrong}                  =wrong= answer

  {aisle}                  =aisle= of the church

  {isle}                   =isle= of Great Britain

  {analysis}               =a-nal'y-sis= of the substance

  {analyses}               =a-nal'y-ses= of many substances

  {currant}                =cur'rant= jelly

  {current}                =cur'rent= of the stream

  {waste}                  =waste= not, want not

  {waist}                  =waist= of a person

  {weak}                   =weak= invalid

  {week}                   =week= before last


LESSON 78

  {haul}                   =haul= the load

  {hall}                   =hall= for the dance

  {greater}                =great'er= than he

  {grater}                 =grat'er= for nutmegs

  {due}                    =due= him from me

  {dew}                    =dew= on the grass

  {do}                     =do= it now

  {wear}                   =wear= good clothes

  {ware}                   =ware= made of tin

  {steel}                  =steel= cars are safest

  {steal}                  =steal= the money

  {sight}                  =sight= to delight in

  {site}                   =site= for the schoolhouse

  {cite}                   =cite= the law

  {ordinance}              =or'di-nance= of the city

  {ordnance}               =ord'nance= department

  {scent}                  =scent= of the flower

  {sent}                   =sent= him the letter

  {cent}                   =cent= apiece

  {minor}                  =mi'nor= and major

  {miner}                  =mi'ner= of coal

  {metal}                  =met'al= filing cabinet

  {mettle}                 =met'tle= of the thoroughbred

  {heart}                  =heart= failure

  {hart}                   =hart= frightened by the hunter


LESSON 79

  {mete}                   =mete= out the punishment

  {meet}                   =meet= at the station

  {meat}                   =meat= for dinner

  {scull}                  =scull= the boat

  {skull}                  =skull= of the skeleton

  {rout}                   =rout= the army

  {route}                  =route= of the mail carrier

  {prey}                   =prey= of the lion

  {pray}                   =pray= to God

  {plow}   }               =plow= the soil
  {plough} }

  {peeling}                =peel'ing= of the apple

  {pealing}                =peal'ing= of the bells

  {our}                    =our= father

  {hour}                   =hour= of midnight

  {one}                    =one= dollar

  {won}                    =won= a race

  {oar}                    =oar= of the boat

  {ore}                    =ore= from the mine

  {wonder}                 =won'der= at the strange sight

  {wander}                 =wan'der= in the fields

  {wait}                   =wait= for me

  {weight}                 =weight= of the ox

  {need}                   =need= of money

  {knead}                  =knead= the bread


LESSON 80

    {Tennessee}

    {Great Britain}

    {Briton}

    {Ben Jonson}

    {Thackeray}

    {Cincinnati}

    {Bismarck}

    {Elizabethan}

    {Appalachian}

    {Alleghany} (Mts.)

    {Allegheny} (City)

    {Louisiana}

    {Philippines}

    {Presbyterian}

    {Philadelphia}

    {Chesapeake}

    {Pittsburgh}

    {Massachusetts}

    {Caribbean}

    {Manila}

    {Mississippi}

    {Chautauqua}

    {Sicily}

    {Italian}

    {Nicaragua}

    {Missouri}

    {Hawaii}

    {Oklahoma}

    {Venezuela}

    {Virginia}

    {Guiana}

    {Guinea}

    {Abyssinia}

    {Hague}

    {Pyrenees}

    {Marseilles}

    {Transvaal}

    {Thames}

    {Mohammedan}

    {Apennines}

    {Leicester}

    {Burroughs}

    {Bede}

    {Carlyle}

    {George Eliot}

    {Thoreau}

    {Macaulay}

    {Disraeli}

    {Roentgen}

    {Raphael}




INDEX

_References are to Lessons._


    abbreviate, 12

    abbreviation, 28

    abdomen, 35

    aberration, 74

    ability, 62

    aborigines, 52

    abridgment, 47

    abscess, 33

    absence, 9

    absolute, 53

    abstruse, 74

    abundance, 47

    abyss, 47

    Abyssinia, 80

    academy, 61

    accede, 57

    accelerate, 28

    acceleration, 40

    accept, 5

    acceptance, 16

    accepted, 25

    accessible, 47

    accession, 20

    accessory, 57

    accident, 57

    accidentally, 40

    accommodate, 3

    accompaniment, 29

    accompanying, 35

    accomplish, 57

    account, 35

    accountant, 61

    accrued, 40

    accumulate, 36

    accuracy, 20

    accusative, 11

    accustomed, 59

    acetic, 61

    acetylene, 53

    ache, 54

    achieve, 61

    achievement, 16

    achromatic, 74

    acknowledge, 24

    acknowledgment, 4

    acoustics, 40

    acquaintance, 31

    acquainted, 35

    acquiesce, 30

    acquisition, 60

    across, 9

    acute, 62

    adaptability, 63

    address, 14

    adjacent, 7

    adjective, 63

    admirable, 31

    admire, 63

    admissible, 31

    admittance, 61

    admitted, 61

    advancement, 63

    advertise, 21

    advertisement, 24

    advertising, 36

    advice, 11

    advisable, 40

    advise, 11

    aeroplane, 63

    affect, 3

    affidavit, 36

    again, 36

    aggregation, 25

    agrarian, 54

    agreeable, 24

    agreement, 16

    aisle, 77

    albumen, 63

    alcohol, 10

    algebra, 7

    algebraic, 24

    alien, 47

    alimentary, 34

    alkali, 24

    alkaline, 64

    allege, 24

    Alleghany (Mts.), 80

    Allegheny (City), 80

    allegiance, 24

    allegory, 59

    alliances, 35

    allies, 37

    alligators, 14

    alliteration, 40

    allotment, 11

    allotting, 11

    allowed, 59

    all right, 1

    allusion, 37

    ally, 59

    alphabet, 48

    already, 2

    altar, 21

    alter, 21

    alternate, 37

    altogether, 24

    aluminum, 59

    always, 5

    amateur, 34

    ambassador, 59

    ambitious, 43

    amenable, 45

    ammonia, 7

    amount, 37

    analogous, 64

    analyses, 77

    analysis, 77

    analytic, 21

    analyze, 12

    anarchy, 64

    ancestors, 43

    ancient, 24

    angel, 3

    angle, 3

    anhydrous, 52

    annihilated, 45

    annual, 20

    annually, 37

    annuity, 61

    anoints, 64

    answer, 64

    Antarctic, 24

    antecedent, 11

    antiquity, 64

    anxiety, 52

    anxious, 33

    any, 20

    apartment, 40

    Apennines, 80

    apologize, 37

    apostrophe, 54

    Appalachian, 80

    apparatus, 8

    apparel, 40

    apparent, 14

    appeal, 54

    appearance, 4

    applied, 54

    appositive, 54

    appreciate, 24

    approach, 40

    approve, 54

    approximate, 24

    appurtenance, 54

    aqueduct, 18

    arc, 12

    architect, 37

    architecture, 24

    arctic, 24

    argument, 52

    aristocrat, 64

    arithmetic, 20

    arithmetical, 34

    ark, 12

    armor, 65

    around, 67

    arrangement, 16

    Arthur, 24

    article, 24

    articles, 65

    artisans, 45

    ascend, 24

    ascension, 65

    ascent, 52

    ascertain, 45

    asceticism, 74

    asked, 24

    asparagus, 28

    assassin, 59

    assassinate, 39

    assassination, 24

    assault, 59

    assistant, 45

    assume, 46

    athlete, 16

    athletics, 4

    atmosphere, 18

    attack, 9

    attacked, 9

    attendance, 24

    attention, 59

    attorney, 39

    attract, 7

    audience, 67

    aught, 76

    Augustus, 7

    auricle, 67

    author, 24

    authority, 46

    autumn, 30

    auxiliary, 5

    avoirdupois, 39

    awful, 67

    awfulness, 67

    awkward, 46

    axillary, 47

    axiom, 10

    axis, 67

    axle, 67


    bacillus, 74

    bacteriology, 74

    balance, 3

    balanced, 35

    balloon, 36

    bananas, 36

    bankruptcy, 33

    barbarians, 62

    barbarisms, 74

    barbarous, 17

    bare, 47

    bargain, 67

    barometer, 27

    barometric, 74

    barrel, 65

    base, 23

    bass, 23

    bear, 47

    beautiful, 36

    because, 30

    Bede, 80

    been, 76

    before, 19

    begin, 47

    beginning, 1

    belief, 13

    believe, 1

    believing, 65

    beneficence, 62

    beneficial, 23

    benefit, 6

    benefited, 10

    berrying, 76

    berth, 76

    besiege, 15

    Bible, 23

    bicycle, 8

    biennial, 74

    bilious, 40

    bin, 76

    binomial, 18

    biology, 67

    birth, 76

    biscuit, 27

    bisect, 18

    bisector, 4

    Bismarck, 80

    blamable, 40

    blew, 76

    blue, 76

    bluing, 67

    boar, 76

    bolder, 40

    bookkeeper, 67

    bookkeeping, 23

    bore, 76

    borne, 67

    borough, 65

    borrow, 65

    botany, 30

    bouillon, 76

    boulder, 40

    boundaries, 28

    boundary, 14

    bouquet, 47

    brake, 37

    breadth, 37

    break, 37

    breed, 67

    brief, 18

    brigadier, 40

    brilliant, 67

    Britain, 80

    Briton, 80

    bulletin, 40

    bullion, 76

    buoyancy, 18

    buoyant, 27

    bureau, 22

    burglar, 47

    buried, 14

    Burroughs, 80

    burying, 76

    busily, 47

    business, 1

    busy, 7


    cabinet, 68

    Caesar, 10

    calendar, 6

    caloric, 63

    calories, 62

    campaign, 22

    campaigns, 62

    cancel, 15

    cancelation, 40

    canceled, 27

    candidate, 27

    candor, 62

    cannot, 68

    canvas, 76

    canvass, 76

    capacity, 44

    capillarity, 62

    capillary, 15

    capital, 5

    capitol, 5

    captain, 32

    careful, 22

    carefully, 32

    Caribbean, 80

    Carlyle, 80

    carriage, 47

    carrying, 18

    cashmere, 60

    casually, 62

    casualty, 65

    catalogue, 27

    cataract, 62

    catarrh, 60

    catastrophe, 60

    catch, 68

    cathedral, 47

    cavalry, 12

    cease, 18

    ceiling, 18

    celery, 60

    cellar, 63

    cemetery, 9

    censor, 45

    censure, 45

    census, 67

    cent, 78

    center, 39

    centigrade, 55

    centimeter, 63

    central, 68

    centrifugal, 40

    cereal, 18

    certainly, 31

    cession, 35

    changeable, 22

    changing, 58

    chaperon, 60

    character, 12

    characteristics, 18

    chargeable, 22

    chattel, 27

    chauffeur, 4

    Chautauqua, 80

    chemical, 40

    chemistry, 63

    Chesapeake, 80

    chief, 12

    chieftain, 45

    chiffonier, 60

    chimney, 31

    chisel, 63

    chivalry, 60

    chlorine, 30

    chlorophyll, 12

    chocolate, 39

    choir, 76

    choose, 14

    chord, 2

    chosen, 17

    Christian, 22

    chronicle, 44

    Cincinnati, 80

    cinnamon, 63

    cipher, 47

    circle, 39

    circuit, 63

    circular, 47

    circumstances, 14

    cite, 78

    cities, 68

    citizen, 68

    city, 68

    civil, 68

    civilization, 12

    civilize, 35

    classicism, 60

    climbed, 47

    clothes, 14

    coal, 76

    coarse, 14

    coast, 68

    coastal, 45

    codicil, 48

    coefficient, 2

    coercion, 60

    coherence, 27

    coincide, 8

    coincident, 63

    collars, 63

    collateral, 29

    colleague, 58

    collector, 58

    college, 14

    colonies, 55

    colonization, 45

    color, 12

    colossal, 53

    column, 29

    combustible, 28

    coming, 2

    comma, 68

    commence, 36

    commencing, 74

    commensurable, 22

    commerce, 58

    commercial, 9

    commission, 12

    commissioner, 63

    commit, 41

    committal, 58

    committed, 17

    committee, 5

    commodities, 74

    common, 32

    communicate, 33

    community, 63

    companies, 63

    company, 63

    comparative, 7

    comparison, 27

    compel, 18

    compelled, 65

    competent, 39

    competition, 65

    competitor, 44

    complement, 3

    complementary, 40

    complete, 32

    completely, 65

    complexion, 27

    compliment, 3

    complimentary, 40

    compromise, 47

    conceal, 35

    concede, 26

    conceit, 65

    conceive, 15

    conceived, 41

    concentric, 29

    concern, 26

    concession, 58

    conciliation, 28

    concurrent, 57

    condensing, 41

    condition, 44

    conduit, 62

    confectionery, 45

    confederacy, 26

    confederate, 37

    congruent, 40

    conjugate, 30

    conjugation, 47

    Connecticut, 17

    conquer, 39

    conqueror, 26

    conscience, 4

    conscientious, 17

    conscious, 12

    consciousness, 17

    consecutive, 44

    consensus, 47

    consequent, 65

    consistency, 65

    consonant, 26

    conspiracy, 57

    constitution, 29

    constitutional, 40

    consul, 6

    consummate, 57

    contagious, 65

    contemporaneous, 55

    contemporary, 35

    contemptible, 55

    contents, 68

    continental, 68

    continually, 30

    continue, 47

    continuity, 55

    control, 6

    controlled, 47

    convenience, 14

    convenient, 11

    conversely, 45

    cooeperate, 67

    cooeperation, 36

    cooerdinate, 36

    copied, 68

    copy, 68

    cord, 2

    corollary, 3

    corporation, 47

    corpuscle, 55

    correspond, 32

    correspondence, 37

    corresponding, 47

    costume, 26

    cotton, 47

    cotyledon, 53

    council, 6

    counsel, 6

    counterfeit, 26

    countries, 26

    coupon, 68

    courageous, 53

    course, 14

    courteous, 31

    courtesy, 33

    courtier, 40

    cousin, 67

    covetous, 65

    credit, 68

    crevice, 65

    crews, 68

    crisis, 39

    criticise, 8

    criticism, 15

    crucible, 68

    crucifixion, 53

    cruelly, 68

    cruise, 68

    crustacea, 44

    crystal, 9

    crystalline, 33

    crystallization, 15

    crystallize, 12

    cupboard, 18

    curiosity, 40

    currant, 77

    current, 77

    custom, 18

    customary, 40

    cycle, 68

    cyclone, 68

    cylinder, 9

    cylindrical, 53


    dactylic, 53

    dairy, 76

    dative, 69

    debris, 74

    debt, 48

    debut, 74

    decease, 6

    deceased, 58

    deceitful, 74

    deceive, 10

    deception, 74

    decide, 8

    decimal, 48

    decision, 28

    decisive, 39

    declamation, 74

    declaration, 28

    declarative, 17

    declension, 14

    decomposition, 58

    decorated, 41

    defence}, 22
    defense}

    defendant, 22

    deficiency, 41

    deficit, 29

    definite, 5

    definitely, 41

    definition, 22

    Deity, 69

    Delaware, 26

    deleble, 30

    demonstrative, 41

    denominator, 22

    dependence, 41

    dependent, 10

    dependents, 41

    deposit, 39

    depository, 41

    descend, 22

    descendants, 17

    descent, 22

    describe, 4

    description, 2

    desert, 26

    desirable, 18

    despair, 16

    despise, 45

    dessert, 26

    destroy, 18

    determine, 60

    develop, 2

    development, 2

    dew, 78

    diagonal, 9

    diagramming, 60

    dialogue, 26

    diameter, 39

    diamond, 39

    diaphragm, 26

    diary, 76

    didn't, 30

    difference, 7

    different, 12

    difficulty, 28

    diffusion, 53

    dilapidated, 33

    dilemma, 48

    dimensions, 30

    diminish, 36

    dining, 8

    diphtheria, 26

    direct, 48

    disagree, 31

    disagreeable, 36

    disappear, 1

    disappearance, 18

    disappeared, 16

    disappoint, 1

    disappointed, 8

    disappointing, 63

    disappointment, 12

    discernment, 65

    disciple, 39

    discipline, 26

    discourage, 60

    discovery, 69

    discrepancy, 63

    discussion, 35

    disease, 6

    disguised, 69

    Disraeli, 80

    dissatisfied, 65

    dissatisfy, 37

    dissension, 48

    dissenter, 65

    dissimilar, 32

    dissipate, 68

    dissociation, 58

    dissolve, 11

    distillate, 69

    distillation, 37

    divide, 16

    divided, 48

    dividend, 68

    divine, 48

    divisibility, 58

    divisible, 14

    division, 32

    divisor, 39

    do, 78

    does, 22

    doesn't, 26

    don't, 68

    dose, 48

    doze, 22

    drooped, 32

    dropped, 15

    drowned, 26

    dual, 76

    dubious, 48

    due, 78

    duel, 76

    duly, 69

    dyeing, 18

    dying, 18

    dyspepsia, 34


    earnest, 69

    easement, 48

    eccentric, 34

    ecclesiastical, 26

    economic, 27

    ecstasy, 15

    edible, 41

    effect, 3

    effective, 48

    effervescence, 34

    efficiency, 15

    efficient, 31

    efflorescence, 26

    eighth, 9

    either, 14

    elasticity, 41

    electoral, 41

    electricity, 34

    electrolysis, 23

    electrolytic, 58

    element, 63

    elementary, 36

    elephant, 48

    eligible, 8

    eliminate, 29

    elimination, 12

    Eliot, George, 80

    Elizabethan, 80

    ellipse, 29

    emanates, 35

    embarrass, 7

    embarrassment, 22

    embezzlement, 75

    emigrant, 21

    emigrate, 65

    emigration, 42

    emperor, 26

    emphasis, 31

    emphasize, 30

    employment, 48

    enclose, 48

    encyclopedia, 58

    endeavor, 41

    endorsement, 41

    endorser, 69

    enemies, 13

    enemy, 15

    energy, 39

    enforceable, 58

    enormous, 69

    enough, 42

    enterprise, 69

    enthusiasm, 69

    entrance, 33

    entries, 41

    entry, 41

    envelop, 42

    envelope, 42

    environment, 44

    epitaph, 44

    epoch, 69

    equal, 8

    equally, 16

    equation, 3

    equiangular, 16

    equidistant, 20

    equilateral, 9

    equilibrant, 41

    equilibrium, 20

    equipment, 63

    equipped, 44

    equivalent, 6

    eraser, 48

    erect, 21

    erosion, 48

    erroneous, 31

    error, 48

    erysipelas, 53

    esophagus, 41

    especial, 28

    especially, 13

    essay, 39

    essence, 44

    essential, 18

    etiquette, 74

    euphony, 48

    evacuate, 55

    evaporate, 32

    every, 39

    exaggerate, 11

    exaggeration, 44

    exceed, 15

    excel, 15

    excellence, 20

    excellent, 20

    except, 5

    exchangeable, 74

    excitement, 44

    excommunication, 46

    executive, 69

    exercise, 36

    exhilarate, 58

    exhort, 46

    existence, 13

    expect, 46

    expedition, 41

    expel, 48

    expense, 26

    expenses, 8

    experience, 11

    experiment, 37

    explanation, 41

    exponent, 16

    exterior, 69

    extraordinary, 41

    extravagance, 53

    extreme, 38

    extremely, 41

    extremities, 28


    facet, 42

    facsimile, 53

    Fahrenheit, 14

    familiar, 18

    familiarly, 53

    farther, 69

    fascinate, 26

    fatigue, 42

    faucet, 42

    February, 3

    feign, 55

    feminine, 26

    ferocious, 66

    fertile, 28

    fertilize, 48

    fertilizing, 55

    feudal, 22

    feudalism, 26

    fictitious, 22

    fief, 55

    fierce, 49

    fiery, 35

    filaments, 62

    finally, 1

    financial, 22

    financier, 48

    finely, 36

    following, 65

    forbade, 65

    forcible, 20

    foreign, 12

    foreigner, 48

    forfeit, 48

    formally, 49

    formerly, 22

    formulae, 69

    formula, 69

    forty, 2

    forward, 69

    foundry, 42

    fourth, 2

    franchise, 48

    freight, 22

    friction, 42

    friend, 7

    frolicking, 30

    frustum, 7

    fuchsia, 42

    fuel, 69

    fulfil, 4

    fulfilled, 22

    fulfilment, 69

    fumigate, 49

    fundamental, 22

    further, 69

    fusion, 36


    gaiety, 70

    gas, 5

    gaseous, 34

    gases, 25

    gauge, 13

    general, 35

    generally, 12

    generous, 53

    genitive, 7

    genius, 28

    geography, 49

    geometry, 34

    geranium, 53

    gesture, 53

    getting, 69

    geyser, 63

    ghastly, 69

    ghost, 66

    glacier, 49

    gnashing, 38

    gnat, 69

    goddess, 15

    going, 66

    government, 1

    governor, 9

    grabbed, 66

    gradually, 53

    grammar, 1

    granary, 65

    grandeur, 38

    graph, 70

    grateful, 25

    grater, 78

    Great Britain, 80

    greater, 78

    grievance, 35

    grieve, 34

    grievous, 38

    grotesque, 50

    group, 49

    guarantee, 32

    guaranty, 42

    guard, 12

    guardian, 29

    guess, 70

    Guiana, 80

    Guinea, 80

    gymnasium, 49


    Hague, 80

    hall, 78

    hammer, 70

    handkerchief, 42

    happened, 70

    harass, 49

    harmonically, 66

    hart, 78

    haughty, 70

    haul, 78

    haven't, 49

    having, 21

    Hawaii, 80

    hear, 8

    heart, 78

    height, 6

    heinous, 21

    heir, 20

    hemorrhage, 63

    Henry, 14

    herb, 8

    here, 8

    hereditary, 29

    heresy, 49

    heroes, 70

    hexagon, 49

    historical, 70

    history, 32

    hole, 31

    holiday, 32

    holy, 31

    homogeneous, 9

    homologous, 2

    honor, 49

    honorable, 13

    hop, 70

    hope, 70

    hoped, 49

    hoping, 5

    hopped, 49

    hopping, 5

    horizontal, 25

    horizontally, 70

    hostility, 70

    hour, 80

    humidity, 50

    humorous, 49

    hundred, 70

    hundredth, 49

    hurrying, 49

    hydrochloric, 28

    hygiene, 21

    hygienic, 62

    hyperbole, 42

    hypnotize, 55

    hypocrisy, 42

    hypocrite, 53

    hypotenuse, 2

    hypothesis, 3


    icicle, 44

    identical, 44

    identity, 30

    ignorance, 54

    illegal, 55

    illegible, 35

    illiterate, 74

    illustrate, 30

    imagery, 35

    imaginary, 21

    imagination, 25

    imagine, 31

    immediately, 2

    immense, 35

    immersed, 55

    immigrant, 21

    immigrate, 65

    immigration, 42

    imminent, 44

    impel, 36

    imperative, 18

    impossible, 25

    inaugurate, 34

    inauguration, 53

    incentive, 71

    incidence, 25

    inclose, 48

    inconvenience, 34

    incumbrance, 71

    indefinite, 32

    indelible, 21

    independence, 38

    independent, 7

    indeterminate, 71

    indicative, 18

    indict, 53

    indictment, 70

    indispensable, 38

    indorse, 44

    indorsement, 41

    industrial, 55

    inertia, 55

    inevitable, 54

    infallible, 42

    infantry, 74

    infinite, 44

    infinitive, 11

    infinity, 46

    inflammable, 49

    inflammation, 55

    influence, 55

    influential, 34

    ingredients, 58

    initials, 49

    initiate, 49

    initiative, 58

    initiatory, 34

    innocence, 30

    innocent, 70

    inoculation, 70

    inseparable, 28

    inserted, 70

    insolvency, 70

    instalment, 53

    instead, 70

    instructor, 49

    insurrection, 58

    integer, 25

    integral, 16

    intellectual, 53

    intelligence, 25

    intelligent, 55

    intercede, 70

    intercept, 8

    interest, 9

    interfered, 70

    interference, 49

    interior, 32

    interpret, 32

    interrogative, 29

    intersection, 58

    intolerable, 70

    introduce, 70

    inventories, 70

    inventory, 21

    inversely, 49

    investment, 70

    invisible, 42

    irascible, 58

    irrational, 66

    irregular, 66

    irreparable, 53

    irrepressible, 31

    irresistible, 42

    irrigation, 58

    irritable, 37

    isle, 77

    isolated, 60

    isosceles, 1

    isthmus, 64

    Italian, 80

    itemize, 49

    itinerant, 53

    itself, 38


    jealous, 21

    jealousy, 29

    jeopardy, 28

    Jonson, Ben, 80

    journal, 34

    journalizing, 38

    journey, 66

    judgment, 1

    judicial, 66

    judiciary, 42

    juice, 16

    juicy, 71

    jurisdiction, 74


    kerosene, 35

    kilogram, 74

    kinetic, 71

    knead, 79

    knew, 20

    knight, 25

    knock, 71

    know 15

    knowledge, 28


    labeled, 49

    laboratory, 1

    lacquered, 44

    laid, 20

    larvae, 17

    later, 20

    latter, 21

    laugh, 71

    lead, 6

    league, 60

    lease, 55

    led, 6

    ledger, 7

    legend, 60

    legible, 20

    legion, 60

    legislature, 42

    Leicester, 80

    leisure, 12

    length, 42

    lens, 71

    lessee, 60

    lettuce, 71

    lever, 71

    liabilities, 13

    liability, 13

    librarian, 34

    library, 11

    license, 12

    lien, 25

    lieutenant, 13

    lightning, 20

    likely, 71

    lilies, 35

    lineament, 62

    linear, 25

    liniment, 62

    liquefaction, 64

    liquefy, 28

    liter, 71

    literal, 35

    literature, 13

    lodgment, 42

    logarithms, 25

    lonely, 71

    longitudinal, 54

    loose, 3

    lose, 3

    losing, 3

    Louisiana, 80

    lovable, 71

    lying, 35


    Macaulay, 80

    machine, 60

    mackerel, 50

    maintain, 54

    maintenance, 25

    making, 37

    malleability, 34

    malleable, 42

    mandible, 55

    Manila, 80

    manual, 21

    manufactories, 71

    manufacture, 25

    manufacturer, 66

    manufacturing, 50

    many, 20

    margin, 66

    maritime, 42

    marriage, 29

    married, 66

    marry, 66

    Marseilles, 80

    martial, 58

    marvelous, 54

    masculine, 22

    Massachusetts, 80

    massacre, 25

    material, 36

    materially, 50

    mathematics, 21

    meant, 7

    measurement, 16

    meat, 79

    mechanical, 35

    mechanics, 50

    medians, 15

    medicinal, 71

    medicine, 71

    medieval, 17

    Mediterranean, 5

    medium, 71

    meet, 79

    melon, 43

    memorandum, 50

    mentally, 58

    mercantile, 31

    merchandise, 20

    mercury, 32

    meridian, 42

    merry, 66

    metal, 78

    metallic, 71

    metallurgy, 58

    metamorphosis, 50

    metaphor, 21

    mete, 79

    metonymy, 26

    mettle, 78

    mileage, 28

    militia, 50

    millinery, 50

    miner, 78

    minor, 78

    minute, 25

    minutiae, 58

    miracle, 34

    miscellaneous, 9

    mischief, 21

    mischievous, 9

    Mississippi, 80

    Missouri, 80

    misspelled, 7

    moccasin, 55

    modal, 60

    model, 60

    modern, 59

    Mohammedan, 80

    moisture, 60

    mold, 25

    molecular, 71

    molecules, 60

    monarchy, 60

    monastery, 20

    monkeys, 43

    moraine, 43

    moreover, 58

    mortgage, 10

    mortise, 54

    mosquito, 71

    motor, 44

    mould, 25

    mountain, 44

    mountainous, 71

    moustache, 71

    movable, 25

    much, 71

    mucilage, 21

    multiple, 44

    multiplicand, 36

    muscle, 72

    musician, 37

    mussel, 72

    mustard, 72

    mutiny, 46

    mutually, 46

    muzzle, 72

    mysterious, 46


    narration, 72

    narrative, 25

    natural, 25

    necessary, 1

    necessitate, 66

    necessity, 13

    nectar, 72

    need, 79

    negative, 25

    negotiability, 21

    negotiable, 21

    negotiate, 21

    neighbor, 72

    neither, 20

    neuter, 20

    neutral, 43

    neutralize, 72

    new, 20

    Niagara, 21

    Nicaragua, 80

    nickel, 7

    niece, 9

    nineteen, 33

    ninetieth, 29

    ninety, 6

    ninth, 33

    no, 15

    nomination, 50

    nominative, 8

    nonchalant, 56

    nonsense, 32

    noticeable, 13

    noticing, 50

    notion, 50

    noun, 72

    nucleus, 21

    nuisance, 29

    numerator, 16

    numerical, 31

    nutrients, 72


    oar, 79

    obedience, 50

    oblige, 10

    obliging, 72

    oblique, 25

    obstacle, 72

    occasion, 2

    occasional, 38

    occasionally, 6

    occupation, 13

    occupy, 24

    occur, 11

    occurred, 4

    occurrence, 3

    occurring, 20

    o'clock, 72

    octagon, 66

    odor, 5

    [oe]sophagus, 41

    of, 13

    off, 13

    offered, 50

    Oklahoma, 80

    oligarchy, 64

    omelet, 73

    omission, 20

    omit, 24

    omitted, 8

    omitting, 72

    one, 79

    only, 50

    opaque, 72

    operation, 23

    opinion, 50

    opportunity, 13

    opposite, 5

    opposition, 5

    optician, 72

    optional, 72

    oracle, 72

    orchid, 72

    ordinance, 78

    ordnance, 78

    ore, 79

    organization, 50

    organize, 72

    origin, 16

    original, 29

    oscillation, 17

    osmosis, 38

    ostracise, 28

    ostracism, 28

    ought, 76

    our, 79

    oxidize, 50

    oxygen, 4


    paging, 59

    paid, 17

    palate, 56

    palette, 56

    papacy, 59

    paraffin, 23

    paragraph, 29

    parallel, 1

    parallelogram, 4

    parasite, 29

    parasitic, 67

    parcel, 73

    parentheses, 5

    Parliament, 2

    parliamentary, 57

    partially, 36

    participate, 72

    participial, 29

    participle, 4

    particle, 29

    particular, 27

    partition, 27

    partner, 34

    passed, 34

    past, 34

    pasteurized, 60

    patience, 62

    patriotic, 61

    patriotism, 62

    pavilion, 51

    peace, 4

    peaceable, 23

    peaceably, 43

    pealing, 79

    peculiar, 37

    peculiarity, 59

    peculiarly, 43

    peeling, 79

    pendulum, 17

    peninsula, 38

    penitentiary, 73

    people, 37

    perceive, 28

    percolator, 55

    percussion, 51

    perform, 23

    performance, 62

    perhaps, 10

    perimeter, 20

    period, 62

    permanent, 45

    permissible, 43

    perpendicular, 5

    persecuted, 61

    perseverance, 54

    personification, 56

    perspiration, 23

    persuade, 10

    pertain, 45

    petroleum, 61

    pharynx, 56

    phase, 33

    phenomena, 54

    phenomenal, 30

    Philadelphia, 80

    Philippines, 80

    philosopher, 43

    philosophy, 43

    phosphorus, 15

    phrase, 33

    physician, 36

    physics, 59

    physiology, 14

    piazza, 61

    picture, 61

    piece, 4

    pieces, 61

    piercing, 56

    pioneer, 45

    pistil, 19

    pistol, 19

    Pittsburgh, 80

    plain, 4

    plane, 4

    planned, 9

    planning, 15

    plateau, 45

    pleasant, 11

    pleasure, 46

    plebeian, 19

    pleurisy, 55

    plough, plow, 79

    plural, 46

    pneumatic, 17

    pneumonia, 23

    poison, 51

    policy, 51

    political, 59

    pollination, 56

    polygon, 5

    polyhedral, 54

    polynominal, 7

    poplar, 59

    popular, 59

    porcelain, 45

    porch, 51

    pores, 64

    porous, 38

    positive, 16

    possess, 10

    possession, 6

    possessive, 33

    possessor, 56

    possible, 59

    possibility, 43

    postulate, 43

    potassium, 45

    potato, 11

    potential, 66

    poured, 61

    practical, 16

    practice, 11

    practiced, 56

    prairie, 7

    pray, 79

    precede, 2

    preceded, 45

    precedent, 29

    preceding, 13

    precipice, 56

    precipitate, 8

    precise, 61

    predecessor, 66

    prefer, 23

    preference, 55

    preferred, 19

    prejudice, 5

    preliminary, 55

    preparation, 3

    prepare, 51

    preposition, 51

    Presbyterian, 80

    presbytery, 66

    presence, 32

    presents, 32

    pressure, 23

    prestige, 56

    pretension, 73

    pretentious, 73

    preterit, 73

    prevail, 73

    prevalence, 73

    prevalent, 73

    prevent, 73

    prey, 79

    primary, 73

    primer, 51

    primitive, 56

    principal, 1

    principle, 1

    prism, 51

    privilege, 1

    prize, 71

    probable, 23

    probably, 6

    procedure, 11

    proceed, 4

    proceeded, 28

    process, 51

    profession, 33

    professor, 3

    profitable, 72

    projection, 38

    promissory, 10

    pronounceable, 43

    pronunciation, 37

    proof, 23

    propagation, 54

    prophecy, 17

    prophesy, 17

    propitious, 43

    proportion, 11

    proportional, 15

    proprietary, 57

    proprietor, 16

    proteids, 19

    Protestant, 17

    prove, 10

    psychological, 77

    psychology, 29

    pulley, 28

    punctuation, 56

    pursuant, 72

    pursue, 7

    pursuit, 72

    putting, 72

    pyramids, 33

    Pyrenees, 80


    quadrilateral, 4

    quantitative, 33

    quantities, 29

    quantity, 4

    quarantine, 33

    quarrel, 31

    quarter, 33

    quiet, 3

    quire, 76

    quit, 4

    quite, 3

    quorum, 75

    quotient, 9


    radiate, 56

    radical, 8

    radii, 66

    radius, 66

    rain, 32

    raisins, 66

    rap, 75

    Raphael, 80

    ratio, 31

    rationalisation}, 54
    rationalization}

    really, 16

    receipt, 6

    receipted, 46

    receivable, 8

    receive, 1

    received, 4

    receiver, 46

    recent, 66

    reciprocal, 13

    reciprocity, 43

    recognize, 15

    recollect, 24

    recommend, 2

    recommendation, 17

    recompense, 64

    reconcile, 30

    rectangle, 59

    rectilinear, 54

    reefer, 51

    refer, 6

    referee, 75

    reference, 9

    referred, 6

    referring, 6

    regions, 64

    reign, 32

    reimburse, 53

    rein, 32

    reinforced, 56

    relative, 51

    relatively, 56

    relevant, 56

    relief, 17

    relieve, 17

    relieved, 51

    religion, 19

    religious, 10

    remember, 19

    remit, 66

    remittance, 23

    Renaissance, 13

    renown, 75

    repel, 75

    repetition, 10

    representation, 28

    representative, 19

    requirement, 56

    rescind, 56

    reservoir, 27

    resistance, 19

    resonance, 56

    resources, 9

    respectfully, 6

    respectively, 6

    respiratory, 43

    responsible, 46

    restaurant, 13

    resurrection, 69

    resuscitate, 54

    revenue, 56

    reverence, 56

    reversible, 56

    review, 32

    rhetoric, 19

    rhetorical, 54

    rheumatism, 54

    rhomboid, 12

    rhombus, 5

    rhyme, 16

    rhythm, 10

    rhythmical, 77

    ridiculous, 29

    right, 10

    rinse, 31

    rite, 10

    Roentgen, 80

    rout, 79

    route, 79

    routes, 64

    ruffian, 59

    running, 33


    sacrifice, 61

    sacrilege, 59

    sacrilegious, 59

    safety, 19

    salable, 14

    salaries, 27

    salary, 14

    salmon, 61

    salve, 61

    sandwiches, 59

    sapphire, 61

    satisfactorily, 61

    saving, 61

    scalene, 43

    scarred, 61

    scene, 19

    scenery, 61

    scent, 78

    schedule, 30

    scheme, 59

    scholar, 61

    science, 19

    scientific, 57

    scissors, 19

    scull, 79

    sculptor, 43

    sculpture, 43

    scythe, 62

    sealing, 18

    secede, 14

    seceded, 38

    secession, 27

    secretaries, 62

    secretary, 11

    section, 62

    sector, 52

    segment, 16

    seize, 2

    seized, 23

    seizing, 43

    senate, 62

    sense, 14

    sensible, 43

    sensitive, 43

    sent, 78

    sentence, 11

    sepals, 62

    separable, 45

    separate, 1

    separately, 46

    separation, 17

    separator, 38

    serge, 52

    sergeant, 37

    serial, 18

    servant, 52

    service, 64

    serviceable, 37

    session, 35

    several, 64

    shepherd, 9

    sheriff, 64

    shining, 14

    shipment, 64

    shipped, 52

    shown, 52

    shriek, 52

    Sicily, 80

    siege, 2

    sieve, 17

    sigh, 62

    sight, 78

    sign, 67

    significance, 30

    silhouette, 57

    similar, 2

    similarly, 2

    simile, 15

    simultaneous, 6

    sincere, 59

    sincerely, 10

    sine, 67

    siphon, 19

    site, 78

    sixtieth, 77

    size, 67

    skeleton, 67

    sketch, 52

    skilful, 30

    skull, 79

    sobriquet, 77

    sociability, 77

    sociable, 34

    social, 67

    society, 30

    solder, 46

    soldier, 46

    solecisms, 57

    solemn, 30

    soliloquy, 57

    soluble, 6

    solutions, 51

    something, 67

    son, 76

    sophomore, 7

    source, 10

    souvenir, 45

    sovereign, 11

    sovereignty, 11

    special, 51

    specially, 37

    specific, 17

    specimen, 13

    speech, 4

    sphere, 38

    spherical, 38

    square, 38

    stamens, 67

    statement, 38

    stationary, 8

    stationery, 8

    statistics, 34

    statue, 51

    statute, 51

    steal, 78

    steel, 78

    stimulus, 57

    stirring, 73

    stomach, 23

    stooped, 38

    stopped, 3

    stopping, 30

    straight, 5

    strait, 5

    stratagem, 45

    strategic, 77

    strategy, 36

    strength, 46

    stretch, 38

    strychnine, 77

    studied, 32

    studying, 8

    subjunctive, 46

    submitted, 73

    subp[oe]na, 77

    substitute, 57

    substitution, 46

    subtend, 32

    subtle, 51

    subtract, 27

    subtraction, 51

    subtrahend, 39

    suburbs, 57

    succeed, 14

    succeeded, 19

    success, 14

    successful, 27

    successfully, 13

    succession, 36

    sufficient, 15

    sugar, 51

    suggestion, 73

    sulphur, 33

    summary, 51

    sun, 76

    superintendent, 5

    superpose, 52

    supersede, 5

    superstition, 45

    superstitious, 27

    supplement, 11

    supplementary, 7

    suppose, 24

    surd, 73

    sure, 15

    surely, 19

    surge, 52

    surprise, 4

    surprised, 27

    surprising, 73

    surrender, 73

    suspense, 23

    suspicious, 39

    swimming, 33

    swords, 61

    syllable, 9

    syllogism, 36

    symbols, 57

    symmetrical, 10

    symmetry, 17

    sympathize, 36

    sympathy, 73

    syndicate, 57

    synecdoche, 34

    synonym, 19

    syntax, 7

    synthesis, 57

    synthetic, 57

    systematically, 57


    tacit, 75

    tariff, 8

    technical, 46

    technically, 57

    temperament, 44

    temperance, 75

    temperate, 75

    temperature, 8

    templar, 75

    temporary, 52

    tenant, 52

    tendency, 52

    Tennessee, 80

    territory, 29

    Thackeray, 80

    Thames, 80

    their, 1

    theorem, 4

    theory, 75

    there, 1

    therefore, 16

    thermometer, 19

    thief, 23

    thirst, 75

    thorax, 77

    Thoreau, 80

    thorough, 13

    thoroughly, 16

    those, 23

    though, 27

    thought, 52

    threaten, 77

    threw, 13

    through, 13

    till, 17

    tissue, 77

    title, 75

    to, 1

    tobacco, 27

    together, 2

    tolerance, 33

    tomato, 52

    tonnage, 45

    too, 1

    tough, 75

    traceable, 64

    trachea, 52

    traffic, 33

    tragedy, 5

    tragic, 75

    traitor, 64

    transferred, 15

    transferring, 44

    transitive, 19

    transpose, 64

    Transvaal, 80

    transversal, 52

    trapezium, 44

    trapezoid, 10

    traveler, 64

    traveling, 31

    treacherous, 44

    treachery, 44

    treasure, 52

    treasurer, 11

    treatise, 64

    trial, 23

    triangle, 73

    tried, 23

    tries, 27

    trigonometry, 46

    trinomial, 57

    trough, 52

    trousseau, 57

    truly, 3

    Tuesday, 15

    tuition, 75

    turbine, 46

    twelfth, 9

    two, 1

    typewriter, 46

    tyrannical, 57

    tyranny, 12


    umbrella, 77

    unanimous, 52

    unchangeable, 77

    unite, 38

    unnecessary, 33

    until, 1

    unusual, 38

    usage, 73

    useful, 73

    usefulness, 73

    using, 52

    usual, 27

    usually, 4

    usurpation, 73

    usury, 73


    vacancy, 37

    vaccinate, 38

    vacuum, 11

    valence, 75

    valiant, 77

    valid, 43

    valise, 75

    valleys, 34

    valuable, 38

    vapor, 30

    variable, 27

    variables, 75

    varying, 75

    vegetable, 12

    velocity, 75

    Venezuela, 80

    vengeance, 19

    ventricles, 74

    verified, 39

    vertical, 3

    vertices, 12

    very, 19

    veteran, 30

    veterinary, 56

    vice versa, 64

    vicinity, 50

    vicissitude, 50

    victuals, 19

    village, 2

    villages, 31

    villain, 3

    villainy, 64

    vinculum, 56

    Virginia, 80

    visible, 66

    vitriol, 50

    voice, 51

    volcano, 51

    volcanoes, 51

    volume, 51

    vowel, 75


    waist, 77

    wait, 79

    waiting, 75

    wander, 79

    ware, 78

    warrant, 39

    warrior, 30

    waste, 77

    weak, 77

    wealthy, 50

    wear, 78

    weather, 10

    Wednesday, 7

    week, 77

    weight, 79

    weird, 8

    were, 31

    we're, 31

    where, 9

    whether, 2

    which, 3

    whole, 31

    wholly, 31

    whose, 7

    width, 75

    wield, 39

    witch, 50

    woman, 23

    women, 19

    won, 79

    wonder, 79

    woolen, 75

    woolly, 50

    wrap, 75

    wrapped, 33

    write, 10

    writer, 10

    writing, 2

    written, 6

    wrong, 77

    wrought, 74


    yeoman, 74

    yield, 39


    zinc, 16

    zooelogy, 73




[Transcriber's Note:


* Text enclosed between equal signs was in bold face in the original
  (=bold=).

* Text enclosed between curley brackets was in cursive writing in the
  original {cursive}.

* Pg 69 Replaced "for'mu-lae" with "for'mu-lae".

* Pg 73 Replaced "zo-ol'o-gy" with "zo-oel'o-gy".

* Pg 77 Replaced "sub-poe'na" with "sub-p[oe]'na".]





End of Project Gutenberg's Practical High School Speller, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRACTICAL HIGH SCHOOL SPELLER ***

***** This file should be named 32309.txt or 32309.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/3/0/32309/

Produced by Larry B. Harrison and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
