The Project Gutenberg EBook of Northern Diamonds, by Frank Lillie Pollock

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Northern Diamonds

Author: Frank Lillie Pollock

Release Date: October 8, 2010 [EBook #32323]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NORTHERN DIAMONDS ***




Produced by Al Haines










[Frontispiece: LOWERED THE CAN CAUTIOUSLY BY A STRING]





NORTHERN DIAMONDS


BY

FRANK LILLIE POLLOCK



_With Illustrations_




BOSTON AND NEW YORK

HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY

The Riverside Press Cambridge

1917




COPYRIGHT, 1914 AND 1915, BY PERRY MASON COMPANY

COPYRIGHT, 1917, BY FRANK LILLIE POLLOCK


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

_Published September 1917_




NOTE

This book has appeared in the _Youth's Companion_ in the form of a
serial and sequel, and my thanks are due to the proprietors of that
periodical for permission to reprint.

FRANK LILLIE POLLOCK




ILLUSTRATIONS


LOWERED THE CAN CAUTIOUSLY BY A STRING . . . . . . _Frontispiece_

THE OTHER BOYS HAD BEEN BUSY

"THAT IS OUR CABIN.  LET US COME IN, I SAY"

DRAGGED HIM UP, PROTESTING, AND RUBBED SNOW ON HIS EARS

FLUNG THE SACK INTO THE MAN'S LAP


_From drawings by Harry C. Edwards_




NORTHERN DIAMONDS



CHAPTER I

It was nearly eleven o'clock at night when some one knocked at the door
of Fred Osborne's room.  He was not in the least expecting any caller
at that hour, and had paid no attention when he had heard the doorbell
of the boarding-house ring downstairs, and the sound of feet ascending
the steps.  He hastened to open the door, however, and in the dim
hallway he recognized the dark, handsome face of Maurice Stark, and
behind it the tall, raw-boned form of Peter Macgregor.

Both of them uttered an exclamation of satisfaction at seeing him.
They were both in fur caps and overcoats, for it was a sharp Canadian
December night, and at the first glance Fred observed that their faces
wore an expression of excitement.

"Come in, boys!" he said.  "I wasn't going to bed.  Here, take your
coats off.  What's up?  You look as if something was the matter."

"Is Horace in town?" demanded Peter.

Fred shook his head.  Horace was his elder brother, a mining engineer
mostly employed in the North Country.

"He's still somewhere in the North Woods.  I haven't heard from him
since October, but I'm expecting him to turn up almost any day now.
Why, what's the matter?"

"The matter?  Something pretty big," returned Maurice.

Maurice Stark was Fred's most intimate friend in Toronto University,
from which he had himself graduated the summer before.  He knew
Macgregor less well, for the big Scotch-Canadian was in the medical
school.  His home place was somewhere far up in the North Woods, but he
had a great intercollegiate reputation as a long-distance runner.  It
was, in fact, chiefly in a sporting way that Fred had come to know him,
for Fred held an amateur skating championship, and was even then
training for the ice tournament to be held in Toronto in a few weeks.

"It's something big!" Maurice repeated.  "I wish Horace were here,
but--could you get a holiday from your office for a week or ten days?"

"I've got it already," said Fred.  "I reserved my holidays last summer,
and things aren't busy in a real estate office at this time of year.  I
guess I could get two weeks if I wanted it.  I'm spending most of my
time now training for the five and ten miles."

"Could you skate a hundred and fifty miles in two days?" demanded
Macgregor.

"I might if I had to--if it was a case of life and death."

"That's just what it is--a case of life and death, and possibly a
fortune into the bargain!" cried Maurice.  "You see--but Mac has the
whole story."

The Scottish medical student went to the window, raised the blind and
peered out at the wintry sky.

"No sign of snow yet," he said in a tone of satisfaction.

"What's that got to do with it?" demanded Fred, who was burning with
curiosity by this time.  "What's going on, anyway?  Hurry up."

"Spoil the skating," said Macgregor briefly.  "Well," he went on after
a moment, "this is how I had the story.

"I live away up north of North Bay, you know, at a little place called
Muirhead.  I went home for a little visit last week, and the second day
I was there they brought in a sick Indian from Hickson, a little
farther north--sick with smallpox.  The Hickson authorities wouldn't
have him at any price, and they had just passed him on to us.  The
people at Muirhead didn't want him either.  It wasn't such a very bad
case of smallpox, but the poor wretch had suffered a good deal of
exposure, and he was pretty shaky.  Everybody was in a panic about him;
they wanted to ship him straight down to North Bay; but finally I got
him fixed up in a sort of isolation camp and looked after him myself."

"Good for you, Mac!" Fred ejaculated.

"Oh, it was good hospital training, and I'd been recently vaccinated,
so I didn't run any danger.  It paid me, though, for when I'd pulled
him around a bit he told me the story, and a queer tale it was."

Macgregor paused and went to look out of the window again with anxiety.
Fred was listening breathlessly.

"It seems that last September this Indian, along with a couple of
half-breeds, went up into the woods for the winter trapping, and built
a cabin on one of the branches of the Abitibi River, away up northeast
of Lake Timagami.  I know about where it was.  I suppose you've never
been up in that country, Osborne?"

"Never quite as far as that.  Last summer I was nearly up to Timagami
with Horace."

Fred had made a good many canoeing trips into the Northern wilderness
with his brother, and Horace himself, as mining engineer, surveyor, and
free-lance prospector, had spent most of the last five years in that
region.  At irregular and generally unexpected times he would turn up
in Toronto with a bale of furs, a sack of mineralogical specimens, and
a book of geological notes, which would presently appear in the
"University Science Quarterly," or even in more important publications.
He was an Associate of the Canadian Geographical Society, and always
expected to hit on a vein of mineral that would make his whole family
millionaires.

"Well, I've been up and down the Abitibi in a canoe," Macgregor went
on, "and I think I know almost the exact spot where they must have
built the cabin.  Anyhow, I'm certain I could find it, for the Indian
described it as accurately as he could.

"It seems that the three men trapped there till the end of October, and
then a white man came into their camp.  He was all alone, and
complained of feeling sick.  They were kind enough to him; he stayed
with them, but in a few days they found out what the matter was.  He
had smallpox.

"Now, you know how the Indians and half-breeds dread smallpox.  They
fear it like death itself, but these fellows seem to have behaved
pretty well at first.  They did what they could for the sick man, but
pretty soon one of the trappers came down with the disease.  It took a
violent form, and he was dead in a few days.

"That was too much for the nerve of the Indian, and he slipped away and
started for the settlements south.  But he had waited too long.  He had
the germs in him.  He sickened in the woods, but had strength enough to
keep going till he came to the first clearings.  Somebody rushed him in
to Hickson, and so he was passed on to my hands."

"And what became of the white man and the other trapper?" demanded Fred.

"Ah, that's what nobody knows.  The Indian said that the remaining
half-breed was falling sick when he left.  The white man may be dead by
this time, or perhaps still living but deserted, or he may be well on
the road to recovery.  But I left out the sensational feature of the
whole thing.  My Indian said that the white man had a buckskin sack on
him full of little stones that shone like fire.  He seemed to set great
store by them, and threatened to blow the head off anybody who touched
the bag."

"Shining stones?  Perhaps they were diamonds!" ejaculated Fred.

"It looks almost as if he might have found the diamond fields, for a
fact," said Peter, with sparkling eyes.

Canada was full of rumors of diamond discoveries just then.  Every
Canadian must remember the intense excitement created by the report
that diamonds had been found in the mining regions of northern Ontario.
Several stones had actually been brought down to Toronto and Montreal,
where tests showed them to be real diamonds, though they were mostly
small, flawed, and valueless.  One, however, was said to have brought
nine hundred dollars, and the news set many parties outfitting to
prospect for the blue-clay beds.  But they met with no success.  In
every case the stones had either been picked up in river drift or
obtained from Indians who could give no definite account of where they
had been found.

Could it be that this strange white man had actually stumbled on the
diamond fields--only to fall sick and perhaps to die with the secret of
his discoveries untold?  Fred gazed from Peter to Maurice, almost
speechless.

"Naturally, my first idea was to get up a rescue party to bring out the
sick prospector," Maurice went on.  "But the woods are in the worst
kind of shape for traveling.  The streams are all frozen hard, but
there has been remarkably little snow yet--not near enough for
snowshoes or sledges.  It would be impossible to tramp that distance
and pack the supplies.  Besides, when I came to think it over it struck
me that the thing was too valuable to share with a lot of guides and
backwoodsmen.  If we find that fellow alive, and he has really
discovered anything, it would be strange if he wouldn't give us a
chance to stake out a few claims that might be worth thousands--maybe
millions.  And it struck me that there was a quicker way to get to him
than by snowshoes or dogs.  The streams are frozen, the ice is clear,
and the skating was fine at Muirhead."

"An expedition on skates?" cried Fred.

"Why not?  There's a clear canoe way, barring a few portages, and that
means a clear ice road till it snows.  But it might do that at any
moment."

"A hundred and fifty miles in two days?" said Fred.  "Sure, we can do
it.  I'll set the pace, if you fellows can keep up."

"Anyhow, I came straight down to the city and saw Maurice about it.  He
said you'd be the best third man we could get.  But I had hoped we
could get Horace, so as to have his expert opinion on what that man may
have found."

"The last time I heard from Horace he was at Red Lake," said Fred, "but
I wouldn't have any idea where to find him now.  He always comes back
to Toronto for the winter, and he can't be much later than this."

"Well, we can't wait for him," said Maurice regretfully.  "I'm sorry,
but maybe next spring will do as well, when we go to prospect our
diamond claims."

"Yes, but we've got to get them first," said Peter, "and there's a
man's life to be saved--and it might snow to-night and block the whole
expedition."

"Then we'd get dogs and snowshoes," Maurice remarked, "but it would be
far slower traveling than on skates."

"We must rush things.  Could we get away to-morrow?" Fred cried.

"We must--by the evening train.  Maurice and I have been making out a
list of the things we need to buy.  Have you a gun?  Well, we have two
rifles anyway, and that'll be more than enough, for we want to go as
light as possible.  You'll need a sleeping-bag, of course, and your
roughest, warmest woolen clothes, and a couple of heavy sweaters.
We'll carry snowshoes and moccasins with us, in case of a snowfall.
I'll bring a medicine case and disinfectants."

"Will we have to pack all that outfit on our shoulders?" Fred asked.

"No, of course not.  I have a six-foot toboggan, which I'll have fitted
with detachable steel runners to-morrow, good for either ice or snow.
We'll haul it by a rope.  But here's the main thing--the grub list."

Fred glanced over the scribbled rows of the carefully considered
items,--bacon, condensed milk, powdered eggs, beans, dehydrated
vegetables, meal, tea, bread,--and he was astonished.

"Surely we won't need all this for a week or ten days?"

"That's a man-killing country in the winter," responded the Scotchman
grimly.  "I know it.  You have to go well prepared, and you never can
depend on getting game after snow falls.  Besides, we'll have no time
for hunting.  Yes, we'll need every ounce of that, and it'll all have
to be bought to-morrow.  And now I suppose we'd better improve the last
chance of sleeping in a bed that we'll have for some time."

He went to the window and again observed the sky, which remained clear
and starry, snapping with frost.

"No sign of snow, certainly.  We can count on you, then, Osborne?  Of
course it's understood that we share expenses equally--they won't be
heavy--and share anything that we may get out of it."

"Count on me?  I should rather think so!" cried Fred fervently.  "Why,
I'd never have forgiven you if you hadn't let me in on this.  But we'll
have to do a lot of quick shopping to-morrow, won't we?  Where do we
meet?"

"At my rooms, as soon after breakfast as possible," replied Mac.  "And
breakfast early, and make all the preparations you can before that."

At this they went away, leaving Fred alone, but far too full of
excitement to sleep.  He sorted out his warmest clothing, carefully
examined and oiled his hockey skates and boots, wrote a necessary
letter or two, and did such other things as occurred to him.  It was
long past one o'clock when he did go to bed, and even then he could not
sleep.  His mind was full of the dangerous expedition that he had
plunged into within the last hours.  His imagination saw vividly the
picture of the long ice road through the wilderness, a hundred and
fifty miles to the lonely trappers' shack, where a white man lay sick
with a bag of diamonds on his breast--or perhaps by this time lay dead
with the secret of immense riches lost with him.  And the ice road
might close to-morrow.  Fred tossed and turned in bed, and more than
once got up to look out the window for signs of a snowstorm.

But he went to sleep at last, and slept soundly till awakened by the
rattle of his alarm-clock, set for half-past six.  He had an early
breakfast and packed his clothes.  At nine o'clock he telephoned the
real estate office where he was employed, and had no difficulty in
getting his holidays extended another week.  Business was dull just
then.

At half-past nine he met Maurice and Peter, who were waiting for him
with impatience.  Macgregor had already left his toboggan at a
sporting-goods store to be equipped with runners for use on ice.  But
there remained an immense amount of shopping to do, and all the things
had to be purchased at half a dozen different places.  Together they
went the rounds of the shops with a list from which they checked off
article after article,--ammunition, sleeping-bags, moccasins, food,
camp outfit,--and they ordered them all sent to Macgregor's rooms by
special delivery.

At four o'clock in the afternoon the boys went back, and found the room
littered with innumerable parcels of every shape and size.  Only the
toboggan had not arrived, though it had been promised for the middle of
the afternoon.

"Gracious!  It looks like a lot!" exclaimed Maurice, gazing about at
the packages.

"It won't look like so much when they're stowed away," replied Peter.
"Let's get them unwrapped, and, Fred, you'd better go down and hurry up
that toboggan.  Stand over them till it's done, for we must have it
before six o'clock."

Fred hurried downtown again.  The toboggan was not finished, but the
work was under way.  By dint of furious entreaties and representations
of the emergency Fred induced them to hurry it up.  It was not a long
job, and by a quarter after five Fred was back at Mac's room,
accompanied by a messenger with the remodeled toboggan.

The toboggan was of the usual pattern and shape, but the cushions had
been removed, and a thirty-foot moose-hide thong attached for hauling.
It was fitted with four short steel runners, only four inches high,
which could be removed in a few minutes by unscrewing the nuts, so that
it could be used as a sledge on ice or as a toboggan on deep snow.

During Fred's absence the other boys had been busy.  All the kit was
out of the wrappers, and the room was a wilderness of brown paper.
Everything had been packed into four canvas dunnage sacks, and now
these were firmly strapped on the toboggan.  The rifles and the
snowshoes were similarly attached, so that the whole outfit was in one
secure package.  They hauled this down to the railway station
themselves to make sure that there would be no delay, and dispatched it
by express to Waverley, where they intended to leave the train.  It was
then a few minutes after six.

[Illustration: THE OTHER BOYS HAD BEEN BUSY]

"Well, we're as good as off now," remarked Maurice, with a long breath.
"Our train goes at eight.  We've got two hours, and now I guess I'll go
home and have supper with my folks and say good-bye.  We'll all meet at
the depot."

Neither Fred nor Macgregor had any relatives in the city and no
necessary farewells to make.  They had supper together at a downtown
restaurant, and afterwards met Maurice at the Union Depot, where they
took the north-bound express.

Next morning they awoke from uneasy slumbers to find the train rushing
through a desolate landscape of snowy spruces.  Through the frosted
double glass of the windows the morning looked clear and cold, but they
were relieved to see that there was only a little snow on the ground,
and glimpses of rivers and lakes showed clear, shining ice.  Evidently
the road was still open.

It was half-past ten that forenoon when they reached Waverley, and they
found that it was indeed cold.  The thermometer stood at five above
zero; the snow was dry as powder underfoot, and the little backwoods
village looked frozen up.  But it was sunny, and the biting air was
full of the freshness of the woods, and the spirits of all the boys
rose jubilantly.

The laden toboggan had come up on the same train with them, and they
saw it taken out of the express car.  Leaving it at the station, they
went to the village hotel, where they ate an early dinner, and changed
from their civilized clothes to the caps, sweaters, and Hudson Bay
"duffel" trousers that they had brought in their suit-cases.

They had been the only passengers to leave the train, and their arrival
produced quite a stir in Waverley.  It was not the season for camping
parties, nor for hunting, and no one went into the woods for pleasure
in the winter.  The toboggan with its steel runners drew a curious
group at the station.

"Goin' in after moose?" inquired an old woodsman while they were at
dinner.

"No," replied Peter.

"Goin' up to the pulpwood camps, mebbe?"

"No."

"What might ye be goin' into the woods fer?" he persisted, after some
moments.

"We might be going in after gold," answered Maurice gravely.

He did not mean it to be taken seriously, but he forgot that gold is
mined in several parts of northern Ontario.  Before many hours the word
spread that a big winter gold strike had been made up north, and a
party from the city was already going to the spot, so that for several
weeks the village was in a state of excitement.

The boys suspected nothing of this, but the public curiosity began to
be annoying.

"Can't we start at once?" Fred suggested.

"Yes; there's no use in stopping here another hour," Peter agreed.  "We
ought to catch the fine weather while it lasts, and we can make a good
many miles in the rest of this day."

So they left their baggage at the hotel, with instructions to have it
kept till their return, secured their toboggan at the depot, and went
down to the river.  The stream was a belt of clear, bluish ice, free
from snow except for a little drift here and there.

Half a dozen curious idlers had followed them.  Paying no attention,
the boys took off their moccasins and put on the hockey boots with
skates attached.  They slid out upon the ice and dragged the toboggan
after them.

The spectators raised a cheer, which the three boys answered with a
yell as they struck out.  The ice was good; the toboggan ran smoothly
after them, so that they scarcely noticed its weight.  In a moment the
snowy roofs of the little village had passed out of sight around a bend
of the river, and black spruce and hemlock woods were on either side.
The great adventure had begun.




CHAPTER II

"Don't force the pace at first, boys," Fred warned his companions.
"Remember, we've a long way to go."

As the expert skater, he had taken the leading end of the drag-rope.
His advice was hard to follow.  The ice was in perfect condition; the
toboggan ran almost without friction on its steel shoes, and in that
sparkling air it seemed that it would be easy to skate a hundred miles
without ever once resting.

For a little way the river was bordered with stumpy clearings; then the
dark hemlock and jack-pine woods closed down on the shores.  The
skaters had reached the frontier; it might well be that there were not
a dozen cultivated fields between them and the North Pole.

Here the river was about a hundred feet wide, the long ice road that
Fred had imagined.  Comparatively little snow had yet fallen, and that
little seemed to have come with high winds, which had swept the ice
clear.  More, however, might be looked for any day.

But for that day they were safe.  They rushed ahead, forcing the pace a
little, after all, in a swinging single file, with the toboggan gliding
behind.  In great curves the river wound through the woods and frozen
swamps, and only twice that day had they to go ashore to get round
roaring, unfrozen rapids.  Each of those obstructions cost the boys
half an hour of labor before they could get the toboggan through the
dense underbrush that choked the portage.  But they had counted on such
delays.

Not a breath of wind stirred, and the forest was profoundly still.
Full of wild life though it undoubtedly was, not a sign of it was
visible, except now and then a chain of delicate tracks along the shore.

Evening comes early in that latitude and season.  At sunset Macgregor
estimated that they had covered thirty miles.

"Time to camp, boys!" he shouted from the rear.  "Look out for a good
place--shelter and lots of dry wood."

Two or three miles farther on they found it--a spot where several large
spruce trees had fallen together, and lay dry and dead near the shore.
They drew up the toboggan and exchanged their skating-boots for
moccasins.  Maurice began to cut up wood with a small axe; the others
trampled down the snow in a circle.

Dusk was already falling when the fire blazed up, making all at once a
spot of almost home-like cheerfulness.  Fred chopped a hole in the ice
in order to fill the kettle, and while it was boiling, they cut down a
number of small saplings, and placed them in lean-to fashion against a
ridgepole.  The balsam twigs that they trimmed off they threw inside,
until the snow was covered with a great heap of fragrant boughs.  On it
they spread the sleeping-bags to face the fire.

They supped that night on fried bacon, dried eggs, oatmeal cakes, and
tea--real _voyageur's_ tea, hot and strong, flavored with brown sugar
and wood smoke, and drunk out of tin cups.

Leaning back on the balsam couch, they made merry over their meal,
while the stars came out white and clear over the dark woods.  There
was every prospect now of their reaching the trappers' cabin in two
days more, at most.  There were only the two serious dangers--a
snowstorm might spoil the ice, and Macgregor might not be able to hit
upon the right place.

The boys were tired enough to be drowsy as soon as they had finished
supper.  Little by little their conversation flagged; the chance of
finding diamonds ceased to interest them, and presently they built up
the fire and crawled into their sleeping-bags.  It was a cold night,
and except for the occasional cry of a hunting owl or lynx, the
wilderness was silent as death.

The boys were up early the next morning; smoke was rising from their
fire before the sun was well off the horizon.  The weather seemed
slightly warmer, and a wind was rising from the west, but it was not
strong enough to impede them.

After breakfast, they repacked the kit on the toboggan.  The spot had
been home for a night; now nothing was left except a pile of crushed
twigs and a few black brands on the trampled snow.

The travelers were fresh again; now they settled down to a long, steady
stroke that carried them on rapidly.  Three times they had to land to
pass round open rapids or dangerous ice, but about eleven o'clock
Macgregor saw what he had been looking for.  It was a spot where
several trees had been cut down on the shore.  A rather faint trail
showed through the cedar thickets.  It was the beginning of the main
portage that ran three miles northwest, straight across country to the
Abitibi River.  They had been mortally afraid of overrunning the spot.

They boiled the noon kettle of tea to fortify themselves for the long
crossing.  Then they unshipped the runners from the toboggan, put on
their moccasins and snowshoes, and started ashore across a range of
low, densely wooded hills.

The trail was blazed at long intervals, but not cleared, and it was
hard, exasperating work to get the toboggan through the snowy tangle.
After two hours they came out on the crest of a hill overlooking a
great river that ran like a gleaming steel-blue ribbon far into the
north.

"The Abitibi!" cried Macgregor.

They had come a good seventy miles from Waverley.  At that rate, they
might expect to reach their destination the next day; and, greatly
encouraged, they coasted on the toboggan down to the ice, and set out
again on skates.

During the tramp the sky had grown hazy, and the northwest wind was
blowing stronger.  For some time it was not troublesome, for it came
from the left, but it continued to freshen, and the clouds darkened
ominously.

Late in the afternoon the travelers came suddenly upon the second of
the known landmarks.  From the west a smaller river, nameless, as far
as they knew, poured past a bluff of black granite into the Abitibi,
making a fifty-yard stretch of open water that tumbled and foamed with
a hoarse uproar among ice-bound boulders.  Here they had to change
their course, for according to Macgregor's calculation, it was about
fifty miles up this river that the cabin stood.

Again they went ashore, and after struggling through two hundred yards
of dense thickets reached the little nameless river from the west.

The change in their course brought them squarely into the eye of the
wind, and they felt the difference instantly.  The breeze had risen to
half a gale; the whole sky had clouded.  It was only an hour from
sunset, but no one mentioned camping; they were resolved to go on while
the light lasted.  And suddenly Fred, struggling on with bent head
against the wind, saw that the front of his blue sweater was growing
powdered with white grains.

"We're caught, boys!" he exclaimed; and they stopped to look at the
menacing sky.

Snow was drifting down in fine powder, and glancing over the ice past
their feet.  Straight down from the great Hudson Bay barrens the storm
was coming, and the roar of the forest, now that they stopped to
listen, was like that of the tempestuous sea.

"'Snow meal, snow a great deal,'" Macgregor quoted, with forced
cheerfulness.

"Let's hope not!" exclaimed Maurice.

And Fred added: "Anyhow, let's get on while we can."

On they went, skating fast.  As yet the snow was no hindrance, for it
spun off the smooth ice as fast as it fell.  It was the wind that
troubled them, for it roared down the river channel with disheartening
force.

It was especially discouraging to be checked thus on the last lap, but
none of them thought of giving up.  They settled doggedly to the task,
although it took all their strength and wind to keep going.  But all
three were in pretty good training, and they stuck to it for more than
an hour.  The forest was growing dark, and the snow was coming faster.
Then Maurice, rather dubiously, suggested a halt.

"Nonsense!  We're good for another ten miles, at least!" cried Peter,
who seemed tireless.

They shot ahead again.  Evening settled early, with the snow falling
thick.  The ice was white now; skates and toboggan left black streaks,
immediately obliterated by fresh flakes.  Just before complete darkness
fell, the boys made a short halt, built a fire, and boiled tea.  No
more was said of camping.  They had tacitly resolved to struggle on as
long as they could keep going, for they knew that they would have no
chance to use their skates after that night.

It grew dark, but never pitch dark, for the reflection from the snow
gave light enough for them to see the road.  Even yet the snow lay so
light that the blades cut it without an effort.

The wind, however, was hard to fight against.  In spite of his amateur
championship, Fred was the first to give out.  For some time he had
felt himself flagging, dropping behind, and then recovering; but all at
once his legs gave way, and he collapsed in a heap on the ice, half
unconscious from fatigue.

Macgregor and Stark bent over him.

"Got to put him on the toboggan," declared the Scotchman.

Maurice felt that it was madness for two of them to try to haul the
greater load, but without protest he helped to roll the dazed youngster
in the blankets, and to strap him on the sledge.  The next stage always
seemed to him a sort of waking nightmare; he never quite knew how long
it lasted.  The wind bore against him like a wall; the drag of the
toboggan seemed intolerable.  Half dead with exhaustion and fatigue, he
fixed his eyes on Macgregor's broad back, and went on with short,
forced strokes, with the feeling that each marked the extreme limit of
his strength.

Suddenly his leader stopped.  A great black space seemed to have opened
in the white road ahead.

"Another portage!" Macgregor shouted in Maurice's ear.

A long, unfrozen rapid was thundering in the gloom.  With maddening
difficulty, Maurice and Macgregor hacked a road through willow thickets
and got the toboggan past.

Again they were on the ice, with the rapid behind them.  It seemed to
Maurice that the horror of that exertion would never end; then suddenly
the night seemed to turn pitch black, and he felt himself shaken by the
shoulder.

"Get on the toboggan, Maurice!  Come, wake up!" Macgregor was saying.
"Wake up!"

Dimly he realized that he was sitting on the ice--that they had
stopped--that Fred was up again.  Too stupefied to question anything,
he rolled into the blanket out of which Fred had crawled, and instantly
went sound asleep.

It seemed only a moment until he was roused again.  Drunk with sleep,
he clutched the towrope blindly, while Fred, who was completely done
this time, again took his place on the sledge.  Only Macgregor seemed
proof against fatigue.  Bent against the gale, he skated vigorously at
the forward end of the line, and his strong voice shouted back
encouragements that Maurice hardly heard.

The snow was now growing so deep on the ice that the skates ploughed
through it with difficulty.  Still the boys labored on, minute after
minute, mile after mile.  Maurice felt numb with fatigue and half
asleep as he skated blindly, and suddenly he ran sharply into
Macgregor, who had stopped short.  There was another break just
ahead--a long cascade this time, where snowy pocks showed like white
blurs on the black water.

"Going to portage?" mumbled Maurice.

"No use trying to go any farther," replied the medical student, and his
voice was hoarse.  "Fred's played out.  Snow's getting too deep,
anyway.  Better camp here."

Maurice would have been glad to drop where he stood.  But they dragged
the toboggan ashore somehow, caring little where they landed it.  Peter
rolled Fred off into the snow.  The boy groaned, but did not waken, and
they began to unpack the supplies with stiffened hands.

"Got to get something hot into us quick," said Peter thickly.  "Help me
make a fire."

Probably they were all nearer death than they realized.  Maurice wanted
only to sleep.  However, in a sort of daze, he broke off branches,
peeled bark, and they had a fire blazing up in the falling snowflakes.
The wind whirled and scattered it, but they piled on larger sticks, and
Macgregor filled the kettle from the river.  When the water was hot he
poured in a whole tin of condensed milk, added a cake of chocolate, a
handful of sugar and another of oatmeal, too stiffened to measure out
anything.

Maurice had collapsed into a dead sleep in the snow.  Peter shook him
awake, and between them they managed to arouse Fred with great
difficulty.  Still half asleep they swallowed the rich, steaming mess
from the kettle.  It set their blood moving again, but they were too
thoroughly worn out to think of building a camp.  They crept into their
sleeping-bags, buttoned the naps down over their heads and went to
sleep regardless of consequences.

Fred awoke to find himself almost steaming hot, and in utter darkness
and silence.  All his muscles ached, and he could not imagine where he
was.  A weight held him down when he tried to move, but he turned over
at last and sat up with an effort.  A glare of white light made him
blink.  He had been buried under more than two feet of snow.

It was broad daylight.  All the world was white, and a raging snowstorm
was driving through the forest.  The tree-tops creaked and roared, and
the powdery snow whirled like smoke.  Fred felt utterly bewildered.
There was no sign of the camp-fire, nor of the toboggan, nor of any of
his companions, nothing but a few mounds on the drifted white surface.

Finally he crawled out of his sleeping-outfit and dug into one of these
mounds.  Two feet down he came upon the surface of a sleeping-bag, and
punched it vigorously.  It stirred; the flap opened, and Macgregor
thrust his face out, blinking, red and dazed.

"Time to get up!" Fred shouted.

Mac crawled out and shook off the snow, looking disconcerted.

"Snowed in, with a vengeance!" he remarked.  "Where's the camp--and
where's Maurice?"

After prodding about they located the third member of their party at
last, and dug him out.  As for the camp, there was none, and they could
only guess at where the toboggan with their stores might be buried.

"This ends our skating," said Maurice.  "It'll have to be snowshoes
after this.  Good thing we got so far last night."

"No thanks to me!" Fred remarked.  "I was the expert skater; I believe
I said I'd set the pace, and I was the first to cave in.  I hope I do
better with the snowshoes."

"Neither snowshoes nor skates to-day," said Peter.  "We can't travel
till this storm blows over.  Nothing for it but to build a camp and sit
tight."

After groping about for some time they found the toboggan, unstrapped
the snowshoes, and used them as shovels to clear away a circular place.
In doing so they came upon the black brands of last night's fire, with
the camp kettle upon them where they had left it.  Fred ploughed
through the snow and collected wood for a fresh fire, while Peter and
Maurice set up stakes and poles and built a roof of hemlock branches to
afford shelter from the storm.  It was only a rude shed with one side
open to face the fire, but it kept off the snow and wind and proved
fairly comfortable.  Fred had coffee made by this time, and it did not
take long to fry a pan of bacon.  They seated themselves on a heap of
boughs at the edge of the shelter and ate and drank.  They all were
stiff and sore, but the hot food and coffee made a decided improvement.

"What surprises me," remarked Maurice, "is that we didn't freeze last
night, sleeping under the snow.  But I never felt warmer in bed."

"It was the snow that did it.  Snow makes a splendid nonconductor of
heat," replied Macgregor.  "Better than blankets.  I remember hearing
of a man who was caught by a blizzard crossing a big barren up north
with a train of dogs.  The dogs wouldn't face the storm; he lost his
directions; and finally he turned the sledge over and got under it with
the dogs around him, and let it snow.  He stayed there a day and a
half, asleep most of the time, and wouldn't have known when the storm
was over, only that a pack of timber wolves smelt him and tried to dig
him out.  They ran when they found out what was there, but he bagged
two of them with his rifle."

"I don't believe even timber wolves would have wakened me this morning.
I never was so stiff and used up in my life," Maurice commented on this
tale of adventure.

"Yes, we need the rest," said Mac.  "We overdid it yesterday, and we
couldn't have gone far to-day in any case."

"But meanwhile that man at the cabin may be dying," exclaimed Fred.

"If he's dead it can't be helped," responded the Scotchman.  "We're
doing all that's humanly possible.  But if he's alive, don't forget
that he can't get away while this storm lasts, any more than we can."

"Well, it looks as if the storm would last all day," said Fred, gazing
upwards.

The blizzard did last all that day, reaching its height toward the
middle of the afternoon, but it was not extremely cold, and the boys
were fairly comfortable.  They lounged on the blankets in the shelter
of the camp, and recuperated from their fatigue, discussing their
chances of still reaching the cabin in time to do any good.  None of
them could guess accurately how far they had come in that terrible
night, but at the worst they could not think the cabin more than forty
miles farther.  This distance would have to be traveled on snowshoes,
however, not skates, and none of the boys were very expert snowshoers.
It would be certainly more than one day's tramp.

Toward night the wind lessened, though it was still snowing fast.  The
boys piled on logs enough to keep the fire smouldering all night in
spite of the snowflakes, and went to sleep under cover of the hemlock
roof.  Maurice awoke toward the middle of the night, and noticed
drowsily that it had stopped snowing, and that a star or two was
visible overhead.

Next morning dawned sparkling clear and very cold, with not a breath of
wind.  Everything was deep and fluffy with the fresh snow, and when the
sun came up the glare was almost blinding.  It would be good weather
for snowshoe travel, and the boys all felt fit again for another hard
day.

After breakfast, therefore, they packed the supplies upon the toboggan,
unscrewed the steel runners, and put on the new snowshoes.

"We'd better stick to the river," Peter remarked.  "It may make it a
little farther, but it gives us a clear road, and if we follow the
river we can't miss the cabin."

"No danger of going through air-holes in the ice?" queried Fred.

"Not much.  An air-hole isn't generally big enough to let a snowshoe go
through.  We'll pull you out if you do.  Come along."

Off they went again.  But they had not gone far before discovering that
travel was going to be less easy than they had thought.  The snow was
light and the snowshoes sank deep.  They moved in a cloud of puffing
white powder, and the heavy toboggan went down so that it was difficult
to draw it.  Without the smooth, level road of the river they could
hardly have progressed at all.

They braced themselves to the work and plodded on, taking turns at
going first to break the road.  The sun shone down in a white dazzle.
There was no heat in it, but the glare was so strong that they had to
pull their caps low over their eyes for fear of snow-blindness--the
most deadly enemy of the winter traveler in the North.  During the
forenoon they thought they made hardly more than ten miles, and at noon
they halted, made a fire and boiled tea.

The hot drink and an hour's rest made them ready for the road again.
Twice that afternoon they had to make a long detour through the woods
to avoid unfrozen rapids, and once the brush was so dense that they had
to cut a way for the toboggan with the axe.  Once, too, the ice
suddenly cracked under Fred's foot, and he flung himself forward just
in time to avoid the black water gushing up through the snowed-over
air-hole.

The life of the wilderness was beginning to emerge after the storm.
Along the shores they saw the tracks of mink.  Once they encountered a
plunging trail across the river where several timber wolves must have
crossed the night before, and late in the afternoon Maurice shot a
couple of spruce grouse in a thicket.  He flung them on the toboggan,
and they arrived at camp that night frozen into solid lumps.

It was plainly impossible to reach the cabin that day.  Peter, who was
keenly on the lookout, failed to recognize any of the landmarks.

"We'd better camp early, boys," he said.  "We can't make it to-day, and
there's no use in getting snowshoe cramp and being tied up for a week."

They kept on, however, till the sun was almost down.  A faint but
piercing northwest breeze had arisen, and they halted in the lee of a
dense cedar thicket close to the river.  A huge log had fallen down the
shore, and this would make an excellent backing for the fire during the
night.

Drawing up the toboggan, the boys took off their snowshoes and began to
shovel out a circular pit for the camp.  The snow had drifted deep in
that spot.  Before they came to the bottom the snow was heaped so high
that the pit was shoulder-deep.  It was all the better for shelter, and
they cut cedar poles and roofed one side of it, producing a most cozy
and sheltered nook.

Fred continued to pull cedar twigs for bedding, while Peter and Maurice
unpacked the toboggan and lighted the fire against the big log.  Now
that it was laid bare this log proved to be indeed a monster.  It must
have been nearly three feet in diameter, and was probably hollow, but
would keep the fire smouldering indefinitely.  Fred plucked the frozen
grouse with some difficulty, cut them up and put them into the kettle
to thaw out and stew.

This consumed some time, and it was rather late when supper was ready.
A bitterly cold night was setting in.  The icy breeze whined through
the trees, but the sheltered pit of the camp was a warm and cozy place,
casting its firelight high into the branches overhead.

Snowshoe cramp had attacked none of the boys, but the unaccustomed
muscles were growing stiff and sore.  By Macgregor's advice they all
took off moccasins and stockings and massaged their calves and ankles
thoroughly, afterwards roasting them well before the fire.  One side of
the big log was a glowing red ember now, and they piled fresh wood
beside it, laid the rifles ready, and crept into their sleeping-bags
under the shelter.

Fred did not know how long he had slept when he was awakened by a sort
of nervous shock.  He raised his head and glanced about.  All was still
in the camp.  His companions lay motionless in their bags.  The fire
had burned low, and the air of the zero night cut his face like a
knife.  He could not imagine what had awakened him, but he felt that he
ought to get up and replenish the fire and he was trying to make up his
mind to crawl out of his warm nest when he was startled by a sort of
dull, jarring rumble.

It seemed to come from the fire itself.  Fred uttered a scared cry that
woke both the other boys instantly.

"What's the matter?  What is it?" they both exclaimed.

Before Fred could answer, there was a sort of upheaval.  The fire was
dashed aside.  Smoke and ashes flew in every direction, and they had a
cloudy glimpse of something charging out through the smoke--something
huge and black and lightning quick.

"Jump!  Run!" yelled Peter, scrambling to get out of his sleeping-bag.

At the shout and scramble the animal wheeled like a flash and plunged
at the side of the pit, trying to reach the top with a single leap.  It
fell short, and came down in a cloud of snow.

Fred had got clear from the encumbering bag by this time, and
floundered out of the pit without knowing exactly how he did it.  He
found Maurice close behind him.  Peter missed his footing and tumbled
back with a horrified yell, and Maurice seized him by the leg as he
went down and dragged him back bodily.

Before they recovered from their panic they bolted several yards away,
plunging knee-deep in the drifts, and then Peter stopped.

"Hold on!" he exclaimed.  "It isn't after us!"

"But what was it?" stammered Maurice, out of breath.

Looking back, they could see nothing but the faint glow from the
scattered brands.  But they could not overlook the whole interior of
the camp, where the intruder must be now lying quiet.

Trying to collect himself, Fred told how he had been awakened.

"It came straight out of the fire!" he declared.

"Out of the log, I guess," said Peter.  "Here, I know what it must be.
It's simply a bear!"

"A bear!" ejaculated Fred.

"Yes, a bear, that must have had his winter den in that big log.  He
was hibernating there, and our fire burned into his den and roused him
out.  That's all."

"Quite enough, I should think," said Maurice.  "Bears are ugly-tempered
when they're disturbed from their winter dens, I've heard.  He's got
possession of our camp, now.  What'll we do?"

"We'll freeze if we don't do something pretty quick," Fred added.

In fact the boys were standing in stockinged feet in the snow, and the
night was bitterly cold.  All looked quiet in what they could see of
the camp.

"I don't see why one of us hadn't the wit to grab a gun!" said Peter
bitterly.

He turned and began to wade back cautiously toward the camp.  The other
boys followed him, till they were close enough to look into the pit.
No animal was in sight.

"Perhaps he's bolted out the other side," muttered Peter.  "Who's going
to go down there and find out?"

Nobody volunteered.  If the bear was still in the camp he must be under
the roofed-over shelter, and, in fact, as they stood shivering and
listening they heard a sound of stirring about under the cedar poles of
the roof.

"He's there!" exclaimed Fred.

"And eating up our stores, as like as not!" cried Maurice.

This made the case considerably more serious.

"We must get him out of that!" Macgregor exclaimed.

How to do it was the difficulty, and, still more, how to do it with
safety.  Both the rifles were still lying loaded under the shelter,
probably under the very feet of the bear.

"Well, we've got to take a chance!" declared Macgregor at last.  "Talk
about cold feet!  We'll certainly have them frozen if we stand here
much longer.  Scatter out, boys, all around the camp.  Then we'll
snowball the brute out.  Likely he's too scared to want to fight.
Anyhow, if he jumps out on one side, the man on the opposite side must
jump into the camp and grab a rifle."

It looked risky, to provoke a charge from the animal in that deep snow,
where they could hardly move, but they waded around the camp till they
stood at equal distances apart, surrounding the hollowed space.

"Now let him have it!" cried Peter.

Immediately they began to throw snowballs into the camp, aiming at that
dark hole under the cedar roof where the animal was hidden.  But the
snow was too dry to pack into lumps, and the light masses they flung
produced no effect.  Peter broke off branches from a dead tree and
threw them into the shelter, without causing the bear to come out.
Finally Fred, who happened to be standing beside a birch tree, peeled
off a great strip of bark and lighted it with a match.

"Hold on!  Don't throw that!" yelled Peter.

He was too late.  Fred had already cast the flaming mass into the camp,
too close to the piles of cedar twigs.  The resinous leaves caught and
flashed up.  There was a glare of smoky flame--a wild scramble and
scurry under the shelter, and the bear burst out, and plunged at the
snowy sides of the pit on the side opposite Fred's position.

He fell back as he had done before, but floundered up with a second
leap.  Maurice, who was nearest, gave a shrill yell and tried to dash
aside, but he stumbled and went head-long in the deep snow.

Fred instantly leaped into the camp.  The shelter was full of smoke and
light flame, but he knew where the rifles lay, and snatched one.
Straightening up, he was just in time to see the bear vanishing with
long leaps into the darkness, ploughing up clouds of snow.

He fired one shot wildly, then another, but there was no sign of the
animal's being stopped, and the next instant it was out of sight.

"Quick!  Stamp out this fire!" exclaimed Peter at his shoulder.

They tore down the flaming branches and beat them out in the snow.  The
light flame was easily put out, but it left the camp a chaos of
blackened twigs and ashes.

"Well, we turned him out," said Maurice, who had hastened in to help.
"Did you hit him, do you think?"

"I wish I'd killed him!" said Fred.  "He's ruined our camp.  But I
don't believe I touched him.  He was going too fast."

Peter had raked the camp-fire together and thrown on fresh wood.  A
bright blaze sprang up, and by its light they took off their stockings
and looked for the dead white of frozen toes.  But it was only Maurice
who had suffered the least frost-bite, and this yielded to a little
snow-rubbing.  The heavy woolen stockings, and perhaps the depth of the
snow itself had protected the rest of them.

Putting on his moccasins Fred then went to look for results from his
shots, but came back reporting not a drop of blood on the snow.  The
bullets had missed cleanly, and the animal was probably miles away by
that time.

"What do you suppose he'll do for the rest of the winter?" Maurice
asked.

"Oh, he'll find some hole to crawl into, or perhaps he'll just creep
under a log and let the snow bury him," said Peter.  "He'll have to
look a long time to find another snug nest like this one, though."

The big log was hollow, as they had thought, and the fire had burned
well into the cavity.  They could see the nest where the bear had lain,
soft with rotted wood and strewn with black hairs.  It seemed a pity to
have turned him out of so cozy a sleeping-place.

The boys' own sleeping-place was in a complete state of wreck.  The
cedar roofing had fallen in, and everything was littered with snow and
burned brush.  The fire had been too light and too quickly extinguished
to do any damage to the stores, however, and they were relieved to find
that the bear had eaten none of the bacon or bread.  Probably the
animal had been merely cowering there for shelter, afraid to come out.

They did not attempt to rebuild the shelter roof, but cleared away the
snow and ashes, and sat in their sleeping-bags by the fire.  After all
the excitement none of them felt like sleeping.  They were hungry,
though, and finally they boiled tea and cooked a pan of bacon and dried
eggs.  Even after this they lay talking for a long time, and it was
between midnight and dawn when they finally fell asleep.

This was the reason why it was long after sunrise when they awoke,
feeling rather as if they had had a bad night.  It was another clear,
bright day, though still very cold, and they felt it imperative that
they should reach the cabin before nightfall.

That forenoon they made all the speed they could, halted for only a
brief rest at noon, and pushed on energetically through the afternoon.
The cabin could not be far, unless Macgregor had mistaken the way.
Look as he would, he could not make out any landmarks that he could
remember; but he had been through only by canoe in the summer, and the
woods have a very different appearance in the winter.

As the afternoon wore on they began to grow anxious.  At every turning
they looked eagerly ahead, but they saw nothing except the unbroken
forest.  It was nearly sunset when Maurice suddenly pointed forward
with a shout of excitement.

They had just rounded a bend of the river.  A hundred yards away,
nestling in a hemlock thicket, stood a squat log hut.  But no trail led
to its door, no smoke rose from its chimney, the snow had drifted
almost to its eaves, and it looked gloomy and desolate as the darkening
wilderness itself.




CHAPTER III

There was so grim an air of desolation about the hut that the boys
stopped short with a sense of dread.

"Can this really be it?" Maurice muttered.

The hut and its surroundings were exactly as the Indian had described
them.  They ventured forward hesitatingly, reconnoitered, and
approached the door.  It stood ajar two or three inches; a heavy drift
of snow lay against it.  Clearly no living man was in the cabin.

"We've come too late, boys," said Macgregor.  "However, let's have a
look."

Using one of his snowshoes as a shovel, he began to clear the doorway.
Fred helped him.  They scraped away the snow, and forced the door open.

For fear of infection, they contented themselves with peeping in from
the entrance; a glance showed them that no man was in that dim
interior, dead or alive.

The cabin was a mere hut, built of small logs, chinked with moss and
mud, and was less than five feet high at the eaves.  The floor was of
clay; the roof appeared to be of bark and moss thatch, supported on
poles.  A small window of some skin or membrane let in a faint light,
and the rough fireplace was full of snow that had blown down the
chimney.

No one was there, but some one had left in haste.  The whole interior
was in the wildest confusion, littered with all sorts of articles of
forest housekeeping flung about pell-mell--cooking-utensils, scraps of
clothing, blankets, furs, traps; they could not make out all the
articles that encumbered the floor.

"The fellow must have simply got well and gone away with the other
half-breed," said Macgregor, after they had surveyed the place in
silence.  "Well, that ends our hope of being millionaires next year.
We've come on a fool's errand."

"Nothing for it now but to go home again, is there?" said Fred, in
disgust.

"We've come one hundred and fifty miles to see this camp, and we ought
to look through it," said Maurice.

"We must disinfect the place before we can go in.  And there's no
chance of our finding any diamonds here," Fred remarked.

"I want to have a look through, anyway.  Let's get out the fumigating
machine."

It was a formaldehyde outfit, consisting simply of a can of the
disinfectant with a bracket attached underneath to hold a small spirit
lamp.  By the heat of the flame, formalin gas, one of the deadliest
germ-killers known, was given off.

Macgregor opened the can, lighted the pale spirit flame, and set the
apparatus on a rude shelf that happened to be just inside the hut.
They forced the door shut again, and sealed it by throwing water
against it, for the water promptly froze.  It was not necessary to
close the chimney, for the germicidal gas is heavier than air, and
fills a room exactly as water fills a tank.

As it would take the disinfectant ten or twelve hours to do its work,
they hastened to construct a camp, for it was growing dark.  It was a
rather melancholy evening.  The nearness of the cabin, with its
sinister associations, affected them disagreeably; and, moreover, they
were all tired with the day's tramp, and chagrined and mortified at
having come, as Peter said, "on a fool's errand."  After all their
glittering hopes, there was nothing now for them except a week's
snowshoe tramp back to Waverley, with barely enough provisions to see
them through.

Still they were curious about the cabin, and before breakfast the next
morning they burst open the ice-sealed door.  A suffocating odor issued
forth, so powerful that they staggered back.

"Good gracious!" gasped Fred, after a spasm of coughing.  "It must
certainly be safe after that!"

They found it impossible to go in until the gas had cleared away, and
so, leaving the door wide open, they returned to breakfast.  Afterward
they idled about, trying to kill time; it was afternoon before they
could venture inside the cabin for more than a moment.

It was disagreeable even then, for the whole interior was filled with
the heavy, suffocating odor.  They coughed, and their eyes watered, but
they managed to endure it.

As they had seen, the contents of the place were all topsy-turvy.  The
furniture consisted solely of a rough table of split planks, and a
couple of rough seats.  A heap of rusty, brown _sapin_ in a corner,
covered with a torn blanket, represented a bed--possibly the one in
which the trapper had died.

In one corner stood a double-barreled shotgun, still loaded.  Three
pairs of snowshoes were thrust under the rafters; several worn
moccasins lay on the floor, along with nearly a dozen steel traps, a
bundle of furs, some of which were valuable, a camp kettle, an axe,
strips of hide, dry bones, a blanket, fishing-tackle--an unspeakable
litter of things, some worthless, some to men in a wilderness precious
as gold.

The last occupants had plainly left in such a desperate hurry that they
had abandoned most of their possessions.  Why had they done it?  The
boys could not guess.

The heavy formalin fumes rose and choked them as they poked over the
rubbish.  But they found nothing to show the fate of the prospector and
the surviving half-breed, or even to tell them whether this was really
the cabin they were seeking.

"Throw this rubbish into the fireplace," said Macgregor.  "Burning is
the best thing for it, and the fire will ventilate the place.  There's
no danger of germs on the metal things."

"These furs are worth something," said Fred, who had been looking them
over.  "There are a dozen or so of mink and marten--enough to pay the
expenses of the trip."

They laid the furs aside, and cramming the rest of the litter into the
snowy fireplace, with the dead balsam boughs, set it afire.  In the red
blaze the hut assumed an unexpectedly homelike aspect.

"Not such a bad place for the winter, after all," Maurice remarked,
casting his eye about.  "I shouldn't mind spending a month trapping
here myself.  What if we did, fellows, eh?  Here are plenty of traps,
and we might clear three or four hundred dollars, with a little luck."

"Here's something new," interrupted Peter, who had been grubbing about
in a corner.

He came forward with a woodsman's "turkey" in his hands--a heavy canvas
knapsack, much stained and battered, and rather heavy.

"Something in this," he continued, trying the rusty buckles.  "Why,
what's the matter, Fred?"

For Fred had uttered a sudden cry, and they saw his face turn deathly
white.  He snatched the sack, tore it open, and shook it out.

A number of pieces of rock fell to the floor, a couple of geologist's
hammers, a pair of socks, and a couple of small, oilcloth-covered
notebooks.

On these Fred pounced, and opened them.  They were full of penciled
notes.

"They're his!" the boy exclaimed wildly.  "They're Horace's notebooks!
I knew his turkey.  Horace was here.  Don't you see?  _He_ was the sick
man!"

For a minute his companions, hardly comprehending, looked on in
amazement.  Then Macgregor took one of the books from his hand.  On the
inside of the cover was plainly written, "Horace Osborne, Toronto."

"It's true!" he muttered.  "It must really have been Horace."  Then,
collecting his wits, he added, "But he must be all right, since he's
gone away."

"No!" Fred cried.  "He'd never have gone away leaving his notes and
specimens.  It was his whole summer's work.  He'd have thrown away
anything else.  He must be dead."

"He was vaccinated.  He's sure not to have died of smallpox," Peter
urged.

Fred had collapsed on the mud floor, holding the "turkey," and fairly
crying.

"He had the diamonds on him.  That half-breed may have murdered him,
and then fled in a hurry.  Things look like it," said Maurice aside to
Peter.

"Yes, but then Horace's body would be here," the Scotchman returned.
"I don't understand it."

"They can't have both died, either, or they'd both be here.  So they
must both have gone.  But no trapper would have left these valuable
pelts, any more than Horace would have left his notes."

"There's something mysterious here," said Fred, getting up resolutely,
and wiping the tears from his eyes.  "Horace has been here.
Something's happened to him, and we've got to find out what it is."

"And we'll find out--if it takes all winter!" Macgregor assured him.

They searched the hut afresh, but found no clues.  They now regretted
having burned the heap of rubbish, which perhaps had contained
something to throw light on the problem.

During the rest of that afternoon they searched and searched again
throughout the cabin, and prowled about its neighborhood.  They dug
into the snowdrifts, poked into the brushwood, scouted into the forest
in the faint hope of finding something that would cast light on
Horace's fate.  All they found was the trapper's birch canoe, laid up
ashore, and buried in snow.

At dusk they got supper, and ate it in a rather gloomy silence.

"We've nothing to go on," said Macgregor.  "I can't believe that Horace
is dead, though, and we must stay on the spot till we know something
more definite."

"Of course we must," Maurice agreed.

"I shouldn't have asked it of you, boys," said Fred.  "I'd made up my
mind to stay, though, till I found out something certain--and it would
have been mighty lonely."

"Nonsense!  Do you think we'd have left you?" Maurice exclaimed.
"Aren't we all Horace's friends?  The only thing I'm thinking of is the
grub.  We have barely enough for a week more."

"What of that?" said Peter.  "We have rifles, haven't we?  The woods
ought to be full of deer--plenty of partridges and small game, anyway.
We must make a regular business of hunting till we get enough meat for
a week, and we must economize, of course, on our bread and canned
stuff.  Then there are sure to be whitefish or trout in the nearest
lake, and we can fish through the ice.  Lucky the Indians left their
hooks and lines.  And we can trap, too."

"Boys," cried Fred, "you're both bricks.  You're solid gold--"  A choke
in his voice stopped him.

"A pair of gold bricks!" laughed Maurice, with a suspicious huskiness
in his own tones.

But the thing was settled.

It turned colder that night, and the next day dawned with blustering
snow flurries.  Their open camp was far from comfortable, and with some
reluctance they moved into the cabin.

A good deal of fresh snow had drifted in, but they swept it out,
brought in fresh balsam twigs for couches, and lighted a roaring fire.

The hut was decidedly homelike and cozy, and a vast improvement on the
open camp.  The smell of formaldehyde had gone entirely.  The light
from the skin-covered window was poor, but that seemed to be the only
drawback, until, as the temperature rose, the roof showed a leak near
the door.  Snow water dripped in freely, in spite of their efforts to
stop it, until Maurice finally clambered to the roof, cleared away the
snow, tore up the thatch, and covered the defective spot with a large
piece of old deer-hide.

In the afternoon it stopped snowing; Macgregor and Fred, with the two
rifles, made a wide circuit round the cabin, but killed no game except
half a dozen spruce grouse.  Not a deer trail did they see; probably
the animals were yarded for the winter.

Without being discouraged, however, Peter set out again the next
morning, this time with Maurice.  Fred, left alone, spent most of the
day in cutting wood and storing it by the cabin door, and the hunters
did not return until just after sunset.  They were empty-handed, but in
high spirits, and had a great tale to tell.

Five miles from camp, Maurice and Peter had come upon the fresh trail
of a moose, and had followed it nearly all day.  Toward the middle of
the afternoon, however, they were obliged to give up the chase and turn
back, for they were fully fifteen miles from home.

On the way to the cabin they chanced upon a well-beaten deer trail that
they felt certain must lead to a "yard."  It was too late to follow it
that day, but they determined to have a great hunt on the morrow.

Killing yarded deer is not exactly sportsmanlike, and is unlawful
besides; but law is understood to yield to the necessities of the
frontier, and the boys needed the meat badly.

The next morning they were off early.  It was clear and cold.  A little
wind blew the powdery snow like puffs of smoke from the trees, and the
biting air was full of life.  It was impossible to be anything but gay
in that atmosphere; even Fred, oppressed with anxiety as he was, felt
its effect.

The fresh snow was criss-crossed here and there with the tracks of
small animals,--rabbits, foxes, and squirrels,--and now and again a
spruce partridge rose with a roar.  These birds were plentiful, and the
boys might have made a full bag if they had ventured to shoot.

It was nearly noon before they reached the deer trail.  They followed
it back for some twenty minutes, and came down into a low bottom, grown
up with small birch and poplar.  Fred had only the vaguest idea what a
deer yard was like; he half expected a dense huddle of deer in a small,
beaten space, and he was consequently much startled when he suddenly
heard a sound of crashing and running in the thickets.

Macgregor's rifle banged almost in his ear.  Maurice fired at the same
instant.  Something large and grayish had shot up into view behind a
thicket, and had departed with the speed of an arrow.  Peter fired
again at the flying target, and Fred caught a single glimpse of a buck,
with antlered head carried high, vanishing through a screen of birches.

"Hit!" shouted Macgregor, and he ran forward, clicking another
cartridge into his rifle.

They had walked right into the "yard."  All round them the snow was
trampled into narrow trails where the herd had moved about, feeding on
the shrubbery.  With a little more caution they might have got three or
four of the animals.

They found the buck a hundred yards away, dead in the snow.  It was no
small task to get him back to the cabin, for he was too fat and heavy
to carry, even if they had cut him up.  They had to haul the carcass
with a thong, like a toboggan, over the snow.  The weather changed, and
it was beginning to bluster again when they arrived, dead tired, to
find the fire gone out and the cabin cold.  But they rejoiced at being
supplied with meat enough to last them for perhaps a month.




CHAPTER IV

That night they heard the timber wolves for the first time, howling
mournfully a little way back in the woods.  No doubt they had scented
the fresh carcass of the deer, and probably there would have been no
venison in the morning if they had not had the wisdom to carry the
carcass into the cabin.  Peter opened the door quietly and slipped out
with a cocked rifle, but the wolves were too wary for him.  Not one was
in sight, and the howling receded and grew fainter.  But they heard it
at intervals again during the night--a dismal and savage note, that
made them feel like making the fire burn brighter.

"They must have followed the trail where we dragged the buck home,"
said Maurice.  "Good thing they didn't happen to strike it before we
got back."

"Oh, they'd hardly venture to attack three of us," replied Peter.  "I
almost wish they would.  We could mow them down with our repeaters, and
you know there's a Government bounty of ten dollars a head on dead
timber wolves.  We might make quite a pile, and besides the skins must
be worth something."

"Might set some traps," Fred suggested.

"No use.  The timber wolf is far too wise to get into any steel trap.
That's why so few of them are killed.  But say, boys, why couldn't we
manage to ambush 'em?"

"How?" Maurice demanded.

"Well, suppose I shot a couple of rabbits to-morrow night and went
through the woods dragging them after me, so as to make a blood trail.
Any wolves that happened to cross it would certainly follow, and I'd
lead them past a spot where you fellows would be ambushed, ready to
pump lead into them."

"Sounds all right," said Fred, "but suppose they overtook you before
you got to the ambush?"

"Oh, they wouldn't dare to attack me.  They'd keep me in sight, stop if
I stopped, and turn if I turned, waiting for a chance to take me at a
disadvantage.  A shot would scatter them, anyway.  The only trouble
would be that they'd scatter so quick when you opened fire that you
wouldn't be able to bag more than one or two.  And I don't suppose the
same trick could be worked twice."

They discussed the matter all that evening and grew so enthusiastic
over it that they determined to try it the next night.  There was no
hope now of diamonds, and the expedition had cost them nearly two
hundred dollars.  A few wolf bounties and pelts, together with the furs
found in the cabin, would cover this and perhaps leave a little profit.

It was cold and cloudy the next day, and they waited impatiently for
evening.  The moon would not rise till nearly midnight, and it was
necessary to wait in order to have light enough for the proposed
ambush.  They sallied out toward eleven o'clock, and shot three
rabbits, which Peter attached to a deerskin thong.  Selecting an open
glade, Maurice and Fred established themselves in ambush under the
thickets, while Peter started on a wide circle through the woods,
trailing his bait, in the hope of attracting the wolves.

Fred and Maurice waited for more than two hours, nearly frozen,
stamping and beating their arms, listening for the hunting cry of the
wolf pack.  At the end of that time Peter reappeared, tired and
disgusted.  The wolves had failed to do their part, and had not picked
up the trail.

Still he was not discouraged, and insisted on trying it again the next
evening.  This time Fred and Maurice stayed in the cabin to keep warm,
listening intently.  At the first, distant howl they were to rush out
and ensconce themselves in a prearranged spot, a quarter of a mile up
the river, which Peter was to pass.  They kept the two repeating
rifles, while Mac carried the double-barreled gun, loaded with
buckshot, which they had found in the cabin.

Half a mile from the shanty Peter shot a swamp hare that was nibbling a
spruce trunk, and a little way farther he secured another.  These
carcasses he tied together with a deerskin thong as before, and trailed
them in the wake of his snowshoes.  This time he intended to make a
longer circuit than on the preceding night.

He dragged this bait across a hardwood ridge and down into a great
cedar swamp on the other side.  In hard weather all the wild life of
the woods resorts to such places for shelter, and here the wolves would
be hunting if there was a pack in the neighborhood.  But he found few
tracks and no sign at all of wolves.

After traveling slowly for two or three miles, Mac sat down on a log to
rest, and as the warmth of exercise died out, the cold nipped him to
the bone through the "four-point" blanket coat.  He got up and moved
on, intending to return in a long curve toward the cabin.  He did not
much care, after all, whether he started any wolves.  It was too cold
for hunting that night.

The dry snow swished round his ankles at the fall of the long racquets.
He still dragged the dead hares, which were now frozen almost as hard
as wood, but not too hard to leave a scent.

He had reached the other side of the swamp when his ears caught
suddenly a high-pitched, mournful howl, ending in a sort of yelp,
sounding indefinitely far away, yet clearly heard through the tense
air.  He knew well what it was.  The pack had struck a trail--possibly
his own, possibly that of a deer.  He would very soon learn which.

Thrilling with excitement, he walked on slowly, turning his head to
listen.  Again and again he caught the hunting chorus of the wolf pack,
far away, but still perceptibly nearer.  He was just then in the midst
of a tangled stretch of second-growth timber, and he hurried on to
reach more open ground.  As soon as he felt convinced that the pack was
following him he intended to turn back toward the river.

He kept moving on, however, and at last came to the river before he
expected it.  He was still more than a mile above the point where the
ambush was to be set, and he paused on the shore and hearkened.  Far
away through the moonlit woods he heard the savage, triumphant yell,
much nearer now--so much so that he felt that he might as well make for
the ambush at once.  He felt suddenly alone and in peril; he longed
earnestly to see his companions.

He started down the river at a swinging trot, still listening over his
shoulder, when the ice suddenly gave way under his feet, and he went
down with so swift a plunge that he had time for only a shuddering gasp.

He had stepped on an airhole lightly crusted over with snow.  He went
down to his neck without touching bottom, and the black water surged up
to his face.  It was the gun that saved him; it caught across the hole,
and he clung to it fiercely.  As the current fortunately was not rapid,
he was able to draw himself up and out upon the ice.

But he found himself unable to extricate his feet.  The long-tailed
snowshoes had gone down point foremost, and now were crossed under the
ice, and refused to come up.  He dared not cut them loose, for in the
deep snow he would have been helpless.  Growing fainter at every
moment, he struggled in the deadly chill of the water for four or five
minutes before at last he succeeded in bringing them up end first, as
they had gone down.

When he staggered back stiffly upon the snow the very life seemed
withdrawn from his bones.  His heavy clothing had frozen into a coat of
mail almost as hard as iron plate.  There was no sensation left in his
limbs, and he trembled with a numb shuddering.

Long forest training told him what must be done.  He must have a fire
at once.  He would have to find a dry birch tree, or a splintered pine
that would light easily.

His benumbed brain clung to this idea, and he began to stumble toward
shore, his snowshoes sheets of ice, and his clothes rattling as he
went.  But with a hunter's instinct he stuck to his gun, tucking it
under his icy arm.

He could see no birch tree, and the bank was bordered with an
impenetrable growth of alders.  He dragged himself up the river, and
each step seemed to require a more and more intolerable exertion.

He could not feel his feet as he lifted and put them down; when he saw
them moving they looked like things independent of himself.  He had
ceased to feel cold.  He no longer felt anything, except a deadly
weariness that was crushing him into the snow.

He went on, however, driven by the fighting instinct, till of a sudden
he saw it--the birch tree he was seeking, shining spectrally among the
black spruces by the river.

It was an old, half-dead tree, covered with great curls of bark that
would flare up at the touch of a match.  He had matches in a
water-proof box, and he contrived to get them out of his frozen pocket.
He dropped the box half a dozen times in trying to open it, opened it
at last with his teeth, and dropped it again, spilling the matches into
the snow.

Snow is as dry as sand at that temperature, however, and he scraped
them up, and tried to strike one on the gun barrel.  But he was unable
to hold the bit of wood in his numbed fingers; there was absolutely no
feeling in his hands, and the match fell from his grasp at every
attempt.  This is a familiar peril in the North Woods, where dozens of
men have frozen to death with firewood and matches beside them, from
sheer inability to strike a light.

Mac beat his hands together without effect.  He began to grow
indifferent; and as he fumbled again for the dropped match he fell at
full length into the snow.

A sense of pleasant relief overcame him, and he decided to rest there
for a few minutes.  The snow was soft, and he had never before realized
how warm it was.  His shoulders were propped against the roots of the
birch, and with a hazy consciousness that game might be expected, he
dragged his gun across his knees and cocked it.  Then, with a
comfortable sense of duty done, he closed his eyes.

Curious and delightful fancies began at once to flood his brain,
fancies so vivid that he seemed not to lose consciousness at all.  How
long he lay there he never knew.  But he grew alive at last to a
vise-like pressure on his left arm that seemed to have lasted for
years, and which was growing to excruciating pain.

He opened his eyes with a great effort.  There were savage, hairy faces
close to his own, pouring out clouds of steaming breath into the frosty
air.  Something had him by the arm with such force that he almost felt
the bones cracking, and something was tugging at his leg.

The nervous shock aroused him as nothing else on earth could have done.
A tingle of horrified animation rushed through his body.  He was on the
point of being torn to pieces by the wolf pack that had trailed him,
and the powerful stimulus of the new peril called out the last reserves
of strength.

He made a convulsive start.  His frozen hand was on the trigger of the
shotgun, and both barrels went off.  At the sudden flash and report the
half-dozen wolves bolted incontinently--all but one gray monster that
got the full force of the buckshot and dropped in its tracks.

Macgregor staggered to his feet, full of terrible cramps and pains in
every muscle.  But his head had cleared somewhat.  He saw the dry birch
tree and again tried to fumble for a match.  Almost by sheer luck he
succeeded in striking it.  The birch bark caught fire and flamed
crackling up the trunk.  The dry trunk itself caught and burned like a
torch.

Macgregor rubbed his face and hands savagely with snow.  They hurt
intensely, but he welcomed the pain, for it showed that they were not
frozen.  He was beginning to feel a little more life when he heard the
creak and flap of snowshoes, and saw Fred and Maurice hurrying up the
river toward him.

"What's the matter?" they shouted, as soon as within hearing distance.
"We heard the shot.  See any wolves?"

Mac tried to shout something in answer, but found that he could not
speak distinctly.

"I see you've bagged one," cried Fred, rushing up.  "Why, man, you're
covered with ice!  What's happened to you?"

"Been in the river," Peter managed to ejaculate.  "Get my moccasins
off, boys--rub feet with snow.  Afraid--I'm going--to lose toes!"

With exclamations of sympathy the boys got his frozen outer clothing
off,--broke it off, in fact, from the caked ice,--removed his moccasins
and socks, and rubbed his feet with snow.  Several of the toes had
whitened, but they regained color after some minutes' rubbing, and
began to hurt excruciatingly.  Peter squirmed with the pain.

"But I don't mind it," he said.  "Rub away, boys.  I certainly thought
I was going to lose part of my feet."

Perhaps the solid cake of ice that had instantly formed over his heavy
socks and moccasins had actually protected them from freezing.  At any
rate, he got off much more easily than he would have thought possible.
The attack of the wolves had left little mark on him, either.  He had a
few light lacerations on his hands and face, but for the most part the
beasts seemed to have laid hold on him where the thick, ice-caked cloth
was almost like armor plate.  And no doubt the arrival of the pack had
saved him from death by freezing.

Fred dragged up the carcass of the fallen wolf and skinned its head and
ears for the Government bounty.  The rest of the pelt was so terribly
torn with buckshot as to be worthless.

"Your scheme didn't work, Mac," he remarked.

"It did work.  It worked only too well," Macgregor protested.  "It's
the best scheme for catching wolves I ever heard of."

"You don't want to try it again, do you?"

"Well--that's a different thing!" he admitted.  "No, I don't know that
I do.  But if I hadn't gone through the ice we would probably have
bagged nearly the whole pack."

After thorough snow friction Mac considered it safe to approach the
fire by degrees.  The ice thawed off his clothing, but left him wet to
the skin.  It was certain that he ought to get back to the cabin and
dry clothing as soon as possible, and he thought he would be able now
to travel.  It was less than two miles.

It proved a painful two miles, but he reached the cabin at last, where
his companions put him to bed in one of the bunks, covered him warmly,
and dosed him with boiling tea.  It was then growing close to three
o'clock in the morning.

Naturally they did not get up as early as usual for breakfast.
Macgregor's feet were sore and somewhat swollen, but there was no
longer any danger of serious trouble.  He had to remain in the cabin
that day and was unable to put on his moccasins, but he was much elated
at his luck in getting off so lightly.  It was snowing and stormy,
besides; none of the boys went out much, except for the endless task of
cutting firewood.  They lounged about the cabin and discussed the
problems that perplexed them so much--whether Horace had really
discovered any diamonds, and what had become of him, and how and
why--until the subject was utterly worn out.  Maurice then made a
checkerboard, and they played matches till they wearied of this
amusement also.

The next day they had to fall back on it again, however, for the
weather was still stormy.  During the afternoon it snowed heavily.
Mac's feet were much better, and he wore his moccasins, but judged it
unsafe to go out into the snow for another day.  In the midst of the
storm Fred and Maurice cut down a couple of dead hemlocks, and chopped
part of them up for fuel.  It was amazing to see what a quantity of
wood the rough fireplace consumed.

"If we had acres of diamond beds we couldn't afford such fires in
town," Maurice remarked.

The next day the weather cleared, but turned bitterly cold.  In the
afternoon Maurice ventured out to look for game, and came back about
four o'clock with three spruce grouse and a frost-bitten nose.  The
boys were all standing outside the cabin door, when Fred suddenly
started.

Round the bend a sledge had just appeared on the river.  It was drawn
by six dogs, coming at a flagging trot through the deep snow; four men
on snowshoes ran behind and beside it.  For a moment the men seemed to
hesitate as they caught sight of the hut.  But they came on, turned up
the shore, and drove straight to the cabin at a gallop.

Three of the _voyageurs_ were plainly French Canadians, or possibly
French half-breeds, wiry, weather-beaten men, dark almost as Indians;
the fourth was big and heavily built, and wore a red beard that was now
a mass of ice.  All of them wore cartridge belts, and four rifles lay
on the packed sledge.

"_Bo' jou'_!" cried the dark-faced men, as they came within hailing
distance.

"_Bon jour_!" Maurice shouted back.  He was the only one who knew any
French, and he knew but little.  He was searching his memory for a few
more words, when the red-bearded man came forward and nodded.

"Didn't know any one was living here this winter," he said.  "Trapping?"

"Hunting a little," said Macgregor.  "Unharness your dogs and come
inside.  It's a cold day for the trail."

"You bet!" said one of the French, and they made no difficulty about
accepting the invitation.  They rapidly unhitched the dogs, which had
sat down, snarling and snapping in their traces; then they unpacked the
sledge and carried the dunnage inside the cabin.

They were a wild-looking set.  The French Canadians were probably
woodsmen, shanty-men or hunters, apparently good-natured and jovial,
but rough and uncivilized.  The Anglo-Saxon, who seemed to be their
leader, was more repellent, and when he took off his _capote_, he
revealed a countenance of savage brutality, with small eyes, a cruel
mouth, and a protuberant jaw, framed in masses of bricky red hair and
beard.

"I don't much like the looks of this crowd!" Maurice whispered in
Macgregor's ear.

"Rough lot, but they'll be away in the morning," answered Peter.

In the North it is obligatory to be hospitable, and the boys prepared
to feed and entertain the party as if they were the most welcome
guests.  At the usual time they prepared supper.  The four newcomers
ate enormously.  During the meal the red-bearded man explained that his
name was Mitchell, that he was "going north with these breeds," as he
rather vaguely put it, and that they had run somewhat short of
provisions.

Luckily, they had food for the dogs; one of the "breeds" presently
produced six frozen whitefish and carried them outside, where he gave
one to each dog with much dexterity.  The fish were bolted in a
twinkling, and the unhappy brutes began to look for a sheltered spot
where they could sleep through the sub-Arctic night.

After supper the French, stuffed to repletion, lay back and engaged in
an animated conversation in a dialect that seemed to be a mixture of
French, English, and Ojibwa.  They laughed uproariously, and seemed
thoroughly happy.  But Mitchell said little, and continually examined
the interior of the hut with keen, restless eyes.

The next morning the visitors showed no anxiety to be off.  They fed
the dogs, lounged about, smoked, and stayed until dinner time.  After
dinner Mitchell announced that the dogs were tired, and would have to
rest that day.

It is very unusual to take a day off the trail for the sake of the
dogs, but the boys made no objection, although secretly much annoyed.
The presence of the strangers inspired them all with uneasiness.
Besides, they could not continue their search or speak freely of it.

The next morning the strangers said nothing about moving on.  They sat
about the fire, and evading a suggestion that they help to cut wood,
played cards nearly all day.

"What's the matter with them?  Are they going to stay here all winter?"
said Fred, in great irritation.

Certainly the dogs needed no more rest.  They pervaded the place,
trying to bolt into the warm cabin whenever the door was opened, and
spending much time in leaping vainly but hopefully at the frozen
carcass of the deer, swung high on a bough in the open air.

The prodigious appetites of the newcomers had not diminished in the
least, and the carcass was rapidly growing less.  The boys thought that
at the least their guests might help replenish the larder, and the next
morning Macgregor proposed that they all go after deer.

"No good to-day," said Mitchell gruffly.  "Snow's coming.  You boys go
if you want to.  We'll mind camp."

That was the last straw; there was no sign whatever of storm.  Peter
went out of the cabin to consult with his friends.

"They think we're greenhorns from the city, and they're trying to
impose on us!" he said angrily.  "If they don't make a move by
to-morrow morning, I'll give them a pretty strong hint."

All the same, fresh meat had to be procured, and after dinner Macgregor
and Maurice took the two rifles and went back to the deer yard to see
if the herd might not have returned.  Fred stayed to watch, for the
boys disliked to leave their guests alone.

The quartette were playing cards as usual, and Fred presently began to
feel lonely.  After hanging about the hut for a time, he went out to
pass the time in cutting wood.

It was very cold, but he much preferred the outer air to the smoky
atmosphere of the shack, and he soon grew warm in handling the axe.  He
spent nearly the whole afternoon at this exercise, and it was after
four o'clock when he finally reentered the cabin.

He opened the door rather quietly, and was astounded at what he saw.

The card game had been abandoned.  The shanty was in a state of
confusion and disorder.  Blankets and bedding were strewn pell-mell;
the contents of the dunnage sacks were tossed upon the floor.
Everything movable in the place seemed to have been moved, and a great
part of the moss chinking had been torn from one of the walls, as if a
hurried and desperate search had been made for something.

And the object of the search had been found.  The four men were bent
together over the table, watching intently, while Mitchell took
something from a small leather sack.  They were all so feverishly
intent that Fred tiptoed up close behind them unobserved.

Mitchell was shaking out little lumps from the sack; each was wrapped
in paper, and each, when he unwrapped it, was a small pebble that
flashed fire.

Fred's heart jumped, and he gasped.  The diamonds!  Horace had really
found them, then!  The sack seemed to contain a large handful--it was
appalling to think what they might be worth!  And then it flashed upon
the boy with increased certainty that his brother must be dead, for
otherwise he would never have left them there.

Mitchell looked up and round at that instant.  At his explosive oath,
the Frenchmen wheeled like a flash.  For a moment there was a deathly
silence, while the four men glared at the boy with scowling faces.
Fred realized that not only the possession of the stones, but probably
his life, hung on his presence of mind.

"Those things are my brother's, Mr. Mitchell," he said, with an outward
coolness that astonished himself.  "He hid them in this cabin.  I don't
know how you came to find them, but I'll ask you to hand them back."

His voice broke the spell of silence.  One of the French said something
in the ear of another, and then dropped quietly back toward the corner
where the men's four rifles stood together.

But Mitchell swept the pebbles together back into the bag.  "Your
brother's?" he said.  "Why, I bought 'em myself from a gang of Ojibwas
down on Timagami.  Rock crystals they call 'em, and I reckon to get ten
or twelve dollars for 'em at Cochrane."

He spoke with such assurance that Fred was taken aback, and did not
know what to say.  Then his eye fell on one of the scraps of paper in
which a stone had been wrapped.  He leaned forward and picked it up.

"Did you put this on it?" he exclaimed indignantly.  "Look!  It's my
brother's handwriting.  'October second, Nottaway River, near Burnt
Lake,' it says.  That's where he found it.  And look at that!"  He
swept his hand round the devastated cabin.  "What did you tear the
place to pieces for if you weren't hunting for something?"

"They're mine, anyway," retorted the woodsman, slipping the precious
bag into his pocket.  "Them papers was wrapped round 'em when I got
'em."

"Impossible!" said Fred.  "I tell you--"

"Shut up!" said Mitchell suddenly, with a snarl.

A sense of his peril cooled Fred's anger like an icy douche, and he was
silent.  There was death in the four grim faces that regarded him.  He
had no doubt that the men would murder for a far less sum than the
value of that sackful of precious stones.

For an instant he thought hard.  He was entirely unarmed, and the men's
rifles stood just behind them.  He would have to wait for
reinforcements.  It was surely almost time for Maurice and Peter to be
back, and they must be warned of the danger before they entered the
cabin.

"All right," he said, with sudden mildness.  "If you can prove that the
stones are really yours, I'm satisfied.  The sack looked like my
brother's, that's all."

Mitchell gave a contemptuous grin.  The Canadians lighted their pipes
again.

Fred felt that they watched him closely, however.  He lounged about the
cabin with assumed nonchalance for a quarter of an hour, and then
ventured to go out on the pretext of bringing in a fresh log for the
fire.  But once outdoors, he put on his snowshoes and rushed down the
trail to intercept his friends.




CHAPTER V

In deadly fear of hearing a shot or a shout from behind, Fred did not
stop running until he was out of sight of the cabin.  He knew the
direction from which the hunters would be sure to return, and he posted
himself in ambush, in a spot whence he could keep watch in front and
rear.

Fortunately, he was not pursued.  Fortunately, too, he had not very
long to wait there, for it was bitter cold.  In the course of half an
hour, he discerned two black specks crossing a strip of barrens to the
north.

Fred ran to meet them.  The hunters had no deer, but each of them
carried a great bunch of partridges.

"What's the matter?  Is the camp on fire?" shouted Macgregor, as Fred
dashed up.

He had to stop to regain breath before he could gasp out an account of
what had happened.

"The diamonds!" Maurice exclaimed.

"But, don't you see, this makes it certain that Horace never left that
cabin alive!" Fred said heavily.

It looked like it, indeed, and no one found anything to say.
Macgregor's face had grown very grim.

"Anyhow, Horace risked his life for those stones,--perhaps lost
it,--and we 're not going to let those wretches carry them off," he
said.  "Besides, the diamonds are the least important thing.  Those
fellows have got our cabin, grub, ammunition, everything.  We're
stranded if we don't get them back."

"We must take them by surprise," said Fred.  "I'd been thinking that we
might come up to the cabin quietly, throw the door open suddenly, and
hold them up."

"They have four rifles," suggested Maurice.

"Yes, but they won't be ready to use them," said the Scotchman.  "It's
the only way."

He threw open the chamber of his rifle, glanced in, then fumbled in his
pockets.

"Lend me a couple of cartridges, Maurice."

"Don't say you haven't any!  I used the last of mine on those
partridges."

"Then we're done!" Peter exclaimed, and he struck his hand furiously on
the breech of the empty repeater.  "Not a shot between us."

They looked at one another hopelessly.

"Come, we've got to do something--or starve in the snow," said Peter,
at last.  "We'll hold them up, anyhow--with empty guns."

"But suppose they fire on us?" Fred asked.

"At the first move any one makes toward a gun, we'll jump for him.  The
cabin's too small to use rifles in, and if it comes to a
rough-and-tumble, why, we'll just have to keep our end up.  But I don't
think it will come to that.  We'll have them bluffed."

Certainly it seemed a long chance to take, but, as Peter said, it was
better than starving in the snow.  They laid down the partridges, and
began to move toward the cabin.

"Take the axe, if it's by the door, Fred," Macgregor advised.  "You'll
go first, and open the door.  We'll aim over your shoulders.  And
remember, at the first hostile movement, jump for them with clubbed
rifles and the axe."

They went on, rather slowly.  The cabin came in view, with no one in
sight, and they made a detour through the hemlocks so as to get as
close to the door as possible without showing themselves.

"Now for it!" muttered Macgregor.

With hearts beating tumultuously, they burst out from the evergreen
screen.  But they had taken only two or three steps, when the cabin
door opened a few inches, and four black rifle barrels were thrust out.

"_Halte-la_!" shouted one of the Canadians.

The boys stopped in their tracks.  They could see nothing of the men
within, nothing except those four ominous muzzles in the streak of
firelight that shone through the crack.

"What do you mean?" cried Macgregor boldly.  "Don't you know who we
are?  Put those guns away, and let us in!"

He ventured another step, but a second voice roared from the doorway,
"Stop!"

It was Mitchell.  Peter stopped suddenly.  The hoarse voice bellowed
again, "Git!"

"What's the matter with you?" Peter persisted.  "That is our cabin.
Let us come in, I say."

[Illustration: "THAT IS OUR CABIN.  LET US COME IN, I SAY"]

"Git, _I_ say!" Mitchell repeated.  "After this, we'll shoot on sight.
I give ye till I count three.  One--two--"

"Back off.  We 're caught!" Peter muttered.

They backed away slowly.  When they were at the edge of the thickets,
Mitchell shouted again:--

"When we're gone, you can come back!  Now keep away for your own good!"

The cabin door closed as they stepped back into the undergrowth.
Macgregor's face was black as he tucked the useless rifle under his
arm.  They were all boiling with rage and mortification.

"If we'd only turned those scoundrels out yesterday!" Peter muttered.

"We couldn't foresee this," said Maurice.  "Those fellows evidently
knew that the diamonds were here--or strongly suspected it.  They must
have heard of it from your sick Indian, or from the third trapper.
They must have been astonished to find us on the spot."

"Very likely," said Fred, "but the present question is what we're going
to do to-night."

"We must make the best camp we can in the snow," remarked Maurice.

"I don't see how we'll cut wood without an axe," said Peter.  "It's
going to be a savage cold night.  We have no blankets, either.  Lucky
we shot those partridges."

But when they came to the spot where they had dropped the partridges, a
fresh disappointment awaited them.  The famished sledge dogs had found
them.  There was nothing left of the fourteen grouse except a litter of
feathers and a few blood-stains on the snow.

Their night was to be supperless as well as cold, it seemed.  Darkness
was already falling, with the weird desolation that the winter night
always brings down on the wilderness.  It had been always impressive,
but now, as they faced the night without food or shelter, it was
appalling.

Destitute of an axe, they would have to make a camp where they could
find fuel, and they scattered to look for it.  It was rapidly growing
too dark to search, but Fred presently came upon a large, dead spruce,
lying half buried in snow, but spiked thickly with dry branches.  He
was breaking these off by the armfuls when the other boys came up in
answer to his calls.

They trampled down the snow, gathered birch bark and spruce splinters,
and laid the kindling against the big back log.  Maurice set about
pulling twigs for a couch, in case the temperature permitted them to
sleep.

"How about matches?  I haven't one on me," said Fred, in sudden anxiety.

Macgregor discovered four rather damp ones in his pockets; Maurice had
a dozen or more, but the snow had got into his pocket, and wet them.

They used up five matches in lighting the fire, but finally the birch
bark flared up, curling, and the spruce twigs began to crackle.

They were sure, at any rate, of a fire, and this little success raised
their spirits wonderfully.  They started at once to bring in all the
loose wood they could find; but it proved to be little, for snow
covered everything except the largest logs.  However, they counted on
the big spruce trunk to burn all night.

Without an axe, it was impossible to build any sort of shelter; so they
sat down close beside the fire, and huddled together to escape the
cold, which was growing hourly more piercing.

In spite of all their efforts, the fire was a poor one.  The spruce
trunk proved rotten and damp, and merely smouldered and smoked.  The
dead branches went off in a rapid flame, and they had to economize them
to make them last the night out.

That was a terrible night.  The temperature must have gone far below
zero.  A foot away from the fire, they could hardly feel its warmth;
their backs and feet were numb, and their faces smoked and scorching.

Two of the boys were tired with a long snowshoe tramp, and all of them
were hungry.  Macgregor's feet were still far from being in a condition
to stand further exposure; they would have frozen again easily, and he
kept them as close to the wretched fire as possible.  Sleep was out of
the question, for they would have frozen to death at six feet away from
the fire.  They sat with their arms round each other, as close to the
blaze as possible, and turned now their faces and now their backs to
the warmth.

Fortunately, there was no wind.  About midnight a pallid moon came up
behind light clouds.  Far in the woods they heard strange, lugubrious
noises, moans, hootings, and once a shrill, savage scream.

Now and then they talked, but they were too miserable from the cold to
say much.  In spite of the cold, they grew drowsy.  Fred could have
gone dead asleep if he had allowed himself to.  He got up, stamped, and
engaged in a rather spiritless bout of wrestling with Peter.  Then they
all straggled off to try to find more wood.

Finally, that night of horror wore itself away.  The light of a pale,
cold dawn began to show.

Feeling twenty years older, they scattered to bring wood again.  They
built up the fire to a roaring blaze that gave some real warmth.

"Aren't those fellows likely to make off the first thing this morning,
and take all our outfit with them?" said Maurice.

"They're almost certain to.  We must keep watch on the cabin," said
Fred.

"We must hope they don't," added Peter.  "We'd have to follow
them--follow them till we dropped or captured them.  For they'd be
taking away our lives with them."

In view of this danger, they sent Maurice at once to reconnoiter the
place, which was not more than a quarter of a mile distant.  He was
gone nearly half an hour, and on his return reported that smoke was
rising from the cabin, but that there were no signs that the men
intended to depart.

And he had had a stroke of luck.  A couple of partridges had flown up
and perched stupidly on a log, so close to him that he had been able to
knock one of them over with a cleverly thrown club.

In less than a minute that partridge's feathers were scattered on the
snow, and it was cut up and roasting on sharp sticks before the fire.
Too ravenous to wait until it was thoroughly cooked, the boys began to
eat it, but Maurice made a wry face at his second mouthful.

"No salt!" he remarked.

The half-cooked flesh was nauseous without salt, and hungry though they
were, they got it down with difficulty.  It did them good, however, and
they all felt more capable of facing the situation.

"The first thing we must do," said Peter, "is to find a better
camping-place, put up some sort of shelter, and gather plenty of wood."

"Why, you don't expect to live like this long?" cried Fred, looking
startled.

"It's hard to say.  You know we're fearfully handicapped.  Our only
chance is to get those fellows off their guard, for if we strike once
and fail, we'll probably never get another chance.  We must lie low,
and make them think that we've gone away, or that we're dead.  We'll
put our new camp half a mile away, or more, and one of us must keep
watch near the cabin from sunrise to sunset."

It sounded disheartening, but they could think of no other plan.
Eventually, Maurice went to stand guard, while Fred and Macgregor
searched for a camp-site.

They could not find what they wanted.  Dead timber in any quantity was
scarce.  At the end of a couple of hours Fred went to relieve Maurice,
and found him walking round and round a tree in order to keep from
freezing.

"I thought I might get a chance to collar the axe," said Maurice, with
chattering teeth.  "But they've carried it inside.  They've taken in
the rest of the venison, too, and they've even got the dogs inside the
shanty.  Afraid we'd shoot them, I suppose."

Maurice tramped off to aid Peter in his search, while Fred stamped
about in the trees.  No one was in sight about the hut, but after a
long time one of the French Canadians came out and went down to the
river with a pail for water.

It made Fred's blood boil to think of the warmth and comfort in that
cabin, from which they had been so treacherously turned out.  He
puzzled his brain to devise some plan of retaliation, but he could
think of nothing except setting fire to the place, and that would
destroy the supplies of friend and foe alike.

His feet grew numb, and he adopted Maurice's plan of running round in a
circle.  He fancied that his ears and nose were frosted, and he rubbed
them with snow.  A long time passed; he wondered what had become of his
companions.  It was nearly noon when Maurice hurried up with his face
full of consternation.  "The fire is out," he said, "and we've used the
last match!"




CHAPTER VI

At this crushing news, Fred left his post and went back with Maurice,
who explained what had happened.

They had found a good camping-ground, where wood was abundant, and had
tried to light a fire.  But the remaining matches proved to have been
badly dampened; the heads were pasty or entirely soaked off.  One by
one they fizzled and went out.  As a last hope, Maurice had hurried
back to their night camp for fire, only to find that the wet log had
smouldered down and gone dead out.

The spot was about two thirds of a mile away, south from the river.  A
great windrow of hemlocks and jack-pines had fallen together, and
afforded plenty of wood.  On one of the logs sat Macgregor, with his
elbows on his knees, and his chin in his hands, the picture of despair;
and at his feet was a litter of bark and kindling, and a dozen burnt
matches.

They all sat down together in silence, and nobody found a word of
comfort.

It was a brilliantly clear day, but the temperature had certainly not
risen to zero, and a slight, cutting wind blew from the west.  The sun
shone in an icy blue sky, but there was no heat in its rays.

"If we only had a cartridge," said Fred, "we might make a fire with the
gun flash."

They all made another vain search of their pockets, in the faint hope
of finding a cartridge or an overlooked match head.

"If we don't find some way to make a fire before sunset," said
Macgregor gloomily, "we'll have to attack the cabin to-night.  I really
don't believe we could live through a night without fire, with nothing
to eat, especially as we had no sleep last night."

"Surely if we went up to the cabin, they'd give us some fire," Maurice
protested.  "They wouldn't let us die in the snow."

"That's just what they count on us to do," said the Scotchman bitterly.

No one said anything about renewing the guard on the cabin.  Nothing
seemed to matter much--nothing except the cold.  The morsels of
half-raw food they had eaten that morning did not keep them from being
ravenously hungry again, and an empty stomach is poor protection
against Arctic cold.

Like the rest of them, Fred was heavily clad, but the cold seemed to
find his skin as if he were naked.  He began to feel numb to the bone,
lethargic, incapable of moving.  Then he realized his danger, forced
himself awake, and tried to think of some expedient for making a fire.

Flints could not be found under three feet of snow.  A
burning-glass--if they only had one!  It should have been included in
the outfit.

And then an idea flashed upon him.  He jumped up suddenly.

"Wait here for me, fellows!" he cried.

He rushed off toward the river, and came back in a few minutes with a
piece of clear ice, almost as large as his palm, and an inch or two
thick.  He slipped off his mittens, and began to rub it between his
hands, so as to melt it down with the heat of his skin.

"See what it is?  Burning-glass!" he exclaimed.

"But you can't make a burning-glass of _ice_!" said Maurice.

"Why not?  Anyhow, I'm going to try."

But before he had worked the ice long, he had to stop, for his hands
seemed freezing.  While he beat and rubbed them, Maurice, incredulous
but willing, took the lump of ice, and shaped it down while the heat
lasted in his hands.  He then passed it on to Macgregor, who in turn
handed it to Fred again.  He finally succeeded in melting and curving
it roughly into the proper shape.

He tried it on the back of his hand.  An irregular but small and
intensely hot spot of light concentrated itself there.

"I do believe it will work!" Peter cried.

They hastily collected a handful of fine, dry hair moss from the fir
branches, and peeled filmy shreds of birch bark.  Fred brought the
"glass" to bear on the little heap.  His numbed hands trembled so that
he could hardly hold it still.  For some time there was no result.
Then a thin thread of smoke began to arise.  The boys held their
breath.  The hair moss suddenly sparkled and flamed.  A shred of bark
caught.  Peter interposed a large roll.  It flared up.

"Hurrah!  We've got it!" cried Macgregor.  "Fred, you've saved our
lives, I do believe."

They piled on twigs, branches, and heavy lumps of wood, and soon had a
brisk fire going.  Better still, they were now assured of having always
the means of making one--at least, whenever the sun shone.

The magical influence of the fire gave back to them a little of their
cheerfulness.  They warmed themselves thoroughly, and then started to
have another look at the outlaws, and to see whether they could find
any small game.  For now that they no longer suffered from the cold,
their stomachs cried loudly for food.

Leaving the empty rifles by the fire, they armed themselves with clubs
and poles for hunting, and had good hopes of being able to knock over a
partridge or a hare.  But the grouse seemed to have turned wild.  They
saw only two at a great distance.  No hares showed themselves, nor
could they find any trace of porcupines on the trees.

Skulking within sight of the cabin, they perceived one of the Frenchmen
carrying in logs of wood for the fire--some of those that Fred himself
had cut.  Mitchell stood by, smoking his pipe, with a rifle under his
arm.  Fred fancied he could smell frying venison as the door was opened.

Plainly the outlaws were on the alert still.  The boys crouched, unseen
and unheard, among the hemlocks; but if they had been armed, they could
easily have picked off the two men at the door.  And they had come to
such a state of rage and desperation that they would very likely have
done it.

They found no comfort in the fact that the robbers showed no
inclination to leave the place.  The boys were perplexed at their
staying, but probably the men had no reason to hurry, and, finding
themselves comfortably placed, had decided to remain where they were
while the extreme cold snap lasted.

In spite of the cold, the boys remained on watch for some time after
the men had gone indoors.  Suddenly Peter laid his hand on Fred's
shoulder, and nodded backward.

A deer had come out of the thickets within thirty yards of where they
lay,--a fine, fat buck,--and stood looking uneasily, sniffing, and
cocking its ears in their direction.  Then, without showing any
particular alarm, it walked on, and passing within twenty yards of
them, disappeared again.

They had to let it go; it was perhaps the cruelest moment they had
lived through.

Deer might be out of the question, but if they were to keep alive, it
was absolutely necessary that they should find something, and they
separated in order to look for small game.

In the course of an hour or two they all straggled back to the camp
fire, half frozen and empty-handed.  Macgregor indeed had seen a
partridge, but his muscles had been so benumbed that he missed his
throw.

After warming themselves, they made another expedition--all but
Maurice, who had neuralgic pains in his face, and who remained by the
fire.  But again Peter and Fred came back without game.

The sun had set by this time, and it was hopeless to try again.  A
hungry night was inevitable, but they tried so to arrange matters that
at any rate they would be warm.  They gathered all the wood that they
could break off or lift.  Then with their snowshoes they dug down to
the ground, heaping the snow up in a rampart behind them, and piled in
balsam twigs, and trusted that in this pit they would be able to sleep.

It grew dark rapidly, and the wind rose.  The fire, flaring and
smoking, drove smoke and sparks into their faces until their eyes
streamed.  It made the leeward side of the fire almost unbearable,
whereas the windward side was freezingly cold.

The temperature was perhaps not quite so low as the night before, but
the gale made it far more disagreeable.  Regardless of smoke and
sparks, they had to sit as near the fire as they dared, or risk
freezing.  Sleep was impossible.

All three of them were faint and sick with starvation, but the plight
of Maurice was the most wretched.  His neuralgia had grown agonizing;
his face was badly swollen, and he sat with his head buried in his
arms, and his inflamed cheek turned to the heat.

Much as they sympathized with him, they could do nothing to relieve
him, except to try to keep up the fire.  This task caused them endless
trouble.  The high wind made it burn furiously fast, and the small
branches they had gathered were licked up like magic.  They had thought
there was enough fuel for the night, but soon after midnight Fred and
Peter were foraging about in the deep snow and the storm for a fresh
supply.

Toward morning their endurance broke down.  They piled on all the rest
of the wood, and went to sleep huddled up by the fire, reckless whether
they froze or not.

Fred was awakened from a painful and uneasy slumber by Peter's shaking
his arm.

"Your ears are frozen," the Scotchman was saying.  "Rub them with snow
at once."

While asleep, Fred had fallen back beyond the range of heat.  It was
broad daylight, and snowing fast.  The fire was low.  All of them were
covered with white, and Maurice was still asleep, sitting up, with his
head fallen forward on his knees.

Never in his life did Fred feel so unwilling to move.  He did not feel
cold; he hardly felt anything.  All he wanted was to stay as he was and
be let alone.

But Macgregor insisted on rousing him, dragged him up, protesting, and
rubbed snow on his ears.  Fred was very angry, but the scuffle set his
blood moving again.  His ears were not badly frozen, but the skin came
off as he rubbed them.  They bled, and the blood froze on as it ran,
and made him a rather ghastly spectacle.

[Illustration: DRAGGED HIM UP, PROTESTING, AND RUBBED SNOW ON HIS EARS]

Maurice was awakened by the disturbance, and sat up stiffly.  He
declared that his neuralgia was much better.

They built up the fire again, and sat beside it, shivering.  Fred felt
utterly incapable either of action or of thought, and even his hunger
had grown numbed.  Maurice obviously felt no better, and Macgregor, who
seemed to retain a little energy, looked at them both with a face of
the gravest concern.  Presently he rose, put on his snowshoes, took a
long pole, and started away with an air of determination.

Maurice and Fred remained sitting by the fire in a sort of lethargy,
and exchanged hardly a word.  Macgregor was gone almost an hour; then
he came back at a run, covered with snow, and carrying a dead hare.  He
skinned the animal, cleaned it, cut it into pieces, and set it to
roast.  At the odor of the roasting meat, the boys' appetites revived,
and they began to take the fragments from the spits before they were
half cooked.  The scorched, unsalted meat was even more tasteless and
nauseating than that of the grouse, but they all bolted it voraciously,
and washed it down by eating snow.

Almost immediately afterward they were taken with distressing cramps
and vomiting, which left both Maurice and Fred in a state of weak
collapse.  Macgregor suffered least, perhaps because he had eaten less
incautiously.  He alone bore the burden of the rest of that day.  He
brought wood, kept the fire up, and propped Fred and Maurice up on
piles of hemlock branches.  There were some small pieces of the hare
remaining, and he finally made the boys chew them, and swallow the
juice.  It seemed to do them good; at any rate, the nausea did not
return.  Then the Scotchman spoke.

"Look here," he said, "we've got to do it this very night--get back
into the cabin, I mean.  We've gone almost too far now, and by another
day we'll be too weak to move."

"But how'll we do it, Peter?" asked Fred weakly.

"There's only one way.  We'll wait till after midnight, when they'll be
asleep, and then burst in the door, aim our rifles at them, and get
hold of their guns before they can recover their wits."

"They'll have the door barricaded.  We'll be shot down before we can
break in."

"I know it's a long chance, but we're living by a succession of
miracles as it is.  It can't last, and I'd as soon be shot as frozen to
death.  I'm most afraid of the dogs.  They'll make an awful uproar, and
probably spring at us as soon as we get in."

As far as Fred was concerned, he felt ready for the attempt, or rather,
perhaps, that it made no difference what he did.  Maurice also
assented, but their force seemed a pitifully small one with which to
oppose four able-bodied, well-armed men.

It was then late in the afternoon.  Peter began to work energetically
at gathering wood enough to last until they should try their desperate
chance, and Fred and Maurice tried to help him.  It had stopped snowing
and had cleared.  The night promised to be intensely cold.

Suddenly, faint and far, but very distinct, the sound of a rifle-shot
resounded through the trees.  They listened, and looked at one another.

"One of those ruffians has gone hunting," Maurice remarked.

"So he has," said Peter.  "And see here," he added, with a suddenly
brightening face, "this gives us a chance.  Let's ambush that fellow as
he comes in.  We'll knock him down and stun him.  That'll make one less
against us, and we'll have his rifle and cartridges.  Perhaps he'll
have something to eat on him.  Boys, it doubles our chances."

The plan did look promising.  At any rate, it would, if successful,
give them a firearm.  The shot must have been fired fully a mile away;
but they put on their snowshoes at once, and hastened in the direction
of the cabin.

The light was failing fast as they stopped about two hundred yards from
the hut, trying to guess just where the returning hunter would pass.
It was very still, and they would be able to hear his footsteps for a
long way.

But they waited for nearly half an hour, and the woods were dusky when
at last their strained ears caught the regular creak, crunch, and
shuffle of snowshoes in the distance.  They were posted too far to the
right, and they had to run fifty yards in order to cross the man's
path.  There they crouched behind the hemlocks, in great fear lest
their enemy had heard their steps.  But in another minute they caught
sight of him.  The man was alone, muffled in a great _capote_, carrying
a rifle over his shoulder, and something on his back--possibly his
game.  His face was indistinguishable, but he looked like one of the
French Canadians.

On he came with a steady stride, now in sight, and now concealed by the
thickets.  He passed within ten feet of the ambush where the boys
crouched palpitating.

"Now!  Tackle him!" Macgregor cried.




CHAPTER VII

The three boys plunged at the man together.  He stopped short, and made
a motion to lower his rifle; but he was too late.  The boys had
fastened on him as wolves fasten on a deer.  He uttered a single,
stifled cry; then they all went down together in a mass of kicking
snowshoes and struggling limbs.  The hunter's efforts were feeble, and
the boys had no trouble in over-powering him.  Fred pinioned his arms,
and Maurice sat on his legs.

Macgregor peered into the man's face.  "Why, this isn't one of that
gang!" he cried.

It had grown almost dark.  Fred bent forward to look at the man.

"It's my brother!" he cried.  "It's Horace!"

"What?  It can't be!" cried Peter and Maurice together.  They let go
their hold on their prisoner in order to look closer.

"I declare, I believe it is!" said Macgregor, stupefied.

It really was Horace Osborne, but he was almost unrecognizable in his
muffling _capote_, long hair, and a three months' growth of beard.  He
had no idea who had thus attacked him, and he was in a towering rage.

"What do you mean by all this?  Who are you, anyway?" he exclaimed,
sitting up in the snow.  Then he looked more closely at his brother,
who was trying to say something, inarticulate, half laughing and half
crying.

"Fred!" he cried, in amazement.  "Is that you?  What on earth are you
doing here?  Who's that with you?  Peter Macgregor--and Maurice Stark!"

"We thought you might be dead!" Fred cried, and Peter and Maurice cut
in alternately:--

"Heard you were sick with smallpox--"

"Came up to find you--"

"Came in on skates, and--"

"A gang of outlaws turned us out of the cabin--"

"Found your diamonds."

"I don't half understand it all," said Horace, "but I see that you
fellows have acted like good friends.  We can't get in the cabin, you
say?  Well, you've a camp somewhere, haven't you?"

They started for the camp in the snow, and on the way Fred gave his
brother a somewhat incoherent account of what had taken place.

"You fellows certainly have acted like friends to me--like brothers,
rather!" said Horace.  "I'll never forget it, boys!"

And he shook hands with them all round.

"Not a bit!" said Maurice, in embarrassment.  "We were hoping that
you'd let us in on the ground floor of a diamond mine.  Fred says there
was a whole bagful of diamonds that you had hidden in the cabin.  What
do you suppose they're worth?"

"If they're all diamonds, perhaps a hundred thousand dollars," replied
Horace.

"Gracious!" gasped Maurice, and said no more.

But Fred's attention had been fixed on the pack that his brother
carried.

"What have you there, Horace?" he asked.

"Grub.  Bacon, hardtack, tea, cold boiled beans.  Why, I never thought
of it, but you must all be as hungry as wolves.  Well, there's enough
for a square meal here, anyhow, and to-morrow we'll find some way of
getting those rascals out of the camp."

They built up the camp-fire, and Horace got out his provisions,
together with a couple of partridges he had shot late that afternoon.
But Macgregor, as medical adviser, refused to let them eat as much as
they wanted.  A little tea and a few mouthfuls of meat were all he
permitted them to have; he promised, however, that they should have a
full meal in a couple of hours.  He took the same ration himself; but
Horace ate heartily.

"But where have you been since you left the cabin?" Fred asked.

"At a lumber camp on the Abitibi, about forty miles from here," Horace
replied.  "I've been convalescing."

"If we'd only known that there was anything of the sort so near,"
remarked Peter, "we'd have made for it ourselves."

"I stumbled on it by chance.  However, I'd better explain in detail.
As you seem to have heard, I came sick to this trappers' shack.  I'd
been in an Indian camp a week before, on the Nottaway River, where they
had had smallpox, but I've been vaccinated four or five times, and
never dreamed of danger.  I didn't know what the matter with me was, in
fact, till the red spots began to appear.

"Of course the trappers were badly scared, especially after one of them
caught the disease and died.  I can't tell you how sorry I was for that
death.  I suppose I wasn't to blame, but I felt somehow responsible.

"The Indian cleared out, and I couldn't blame him.  But I couldn't
afford to let the third man go.  I was over the worst of it by that
time, but I was as weak as a kitten, and could hardly feed myself.  If
he'd deserted me I should have died.  I offered him any sum of money if
he would stick to me, and told him that I'd shoot him if I saw any sign
of his making off.

"I couldn't have aimed straight enough to hit him at a yard just then,
and I suppose he knew it.  Anyhow, he disappeared one morning before I
was awake.  He didn't take much with him except his gun and ammunition.

"I was gaining strength fast, and I was able to stagger about a little.
I could get water, and there was some grub in the shack.  I knew that I
must get out at once, lest snow should come.  I stayed four days; then
I took what grub I could carry, my rifle and a dozen cartridges, and
started.  I left all my specimens, notebooks and everything, for I
didn't dare to carry an ounce more than I could help."

"But the diamonds?  They didn't weigh many ounces," interrupted Maurice.

"I struck for the Abitibi," went on Horace, paying no attention to the
question, "and I was so weak that I couldn't make much speed.  I had
been out five days, and my grub was pretty nearly gone, when I stumbled
into the lumbermen.  They treated me like real Samaritans, took me in
and fed me, and I've been there convalescing ever since.  Day before
yesterday I started back here to get my things.  I had to travel
slowly, for I'm not overstrong yet, and I was hurrying on to get to the
cabin to-night when you pounced on me."

"If you had only taken the diamonds with you!" Fred lamented.

"I did," said Horace.  He looked at the boys with a smile, and then
went on:--

"Those stones, my boy, that you saw in the cabin aren't diamonds.  They
are quartz crystals and rather curious garnets, worth a few dollars at
the most.  Here are the diamonds!"

He took a small leather pouch from an inner pocket; the boys jumped up
in excitement to look.  From the pouch he took a small paper package,
unfolded it, and revealed nine small lumps, which ranged in size from a
small shot to a large pea.  They looked like lumps of gum arabic, but
their edges and angles reflected brilliant sparks in the firelight.

"Those little things?  Are they diamonds?" cried Fred, in some
disappointment.

"Little things?  Why, if they were all perfect stones, they'd be worth
a small fortune.  Unfortunately, the biggest has a flaw in it that you
can see even without cutting it, and some of the others are yellowish
and off color.  It will take an expert to say what they 're worth.  But
the great triumph is to have found diamonds up here at all."

"Yes, and there must be more where these came from," said Maurice,
brightening.  "If you've discovered the beds--"

"I haven't, though," Horace returned.  "Three of these stones I bought
from a camp of Ojibwas.  The rest I found in the gravel of the
creek-beds, mostly along the Nottaway River, but none of them within a
quarter of a mile of another.  Whenever I thought the gravel looked
promising, I sifted some of it.  But I didn't find a trace of the blue
soil that always forms the diamond-beds; if there are diamond-beds up
here, they must be somewhere beyond the region that we have explored."

"But they must be here somewhere," cried Peter, "and there must be more
diamonds where you found those!  I'll certainly come up here next
summer and try my own luck."

"I've thought of doing so myself; that is, if this lot turns out to be
any good.  But getting back to town is the present problem, and we've
got to consider how to recapture the cabin and your outfit of supplies."

"But not before we eat again," said Fred.

Macgregor, who was as famished as any of them, consented, and they
prepared such a banquet as the three castaways had not seen since they
left the cabin.  It almost exhausted the supplies that Horace had
brought, but it did them all a great deal of good.  With a new feeling
of being able to grapple with the problem, they settled down to
consider the question of war.

"We might set fire to the cabin," Fred suggested, "and try to capture
the fellows when they rush out."

"Out of the question," declared Peter, "for, even if it worked, the
provisions would be burned up.  I had thought of stopping up their
chimney during the night.  The smoke would suffocate them in their
sleep, and we could go in and drag them out insensible."

"I am afraid it would waken them first," said Horace.  "We'd have them
coming out with rifles.  Now I'd been thinking that if we only had some
of your formaldehyde fumigator we could get them under control very
easily."

"So we could.  A can of that stuff let through the roof would put them
into a dead stupor without waking them.  The only risk would be that of
killing them all outright.  There was a can of it left, too, but it's
in the cabin."

"No, it isn't!" cried Fred.  "I put it outside in a hollow tree, so as
not to have the stuff in the house.  I could get it in ten minutes."

"Fred, you're a diamond yourself!" Peter exclaimed.  "If it's as you
say, we'll have them out of that cabin in a jiffy."

"Shall we try it to-night?" Maurice asked.

"Why not?  It's nearly midnight, and they must be asleep," said Horace.
"I've no fancy for spending another night and day shivering here in the
snow.  Besides, we're out of grub."

After some consultation, they put on their snowshoes and tramped off
toward the cabin.  It was intensely cold, and very still and clear; a
brilliant moon had come up over the pines.

Fred easily found the hollow tree in which he had hidden the
disinfectant, and came back with the apparatus.  There was an unopened
tin of formaldehyde complete with its little lamp almost full of spirit.

For some time they reconnoitered the cabin cautiously.  A faint glow
shone through the skin window, but no sound either of man or dog could
be heard within.

It would not be possible to introduce the fumigator through the door or
window, and if it were lowered down the chimney, the draft would carry
the gas out again.  But Maurice recollected the hole he had patched in
the roof; it could easily be opened again.  He volunteered to set the
"smoker" going.

This was really the most dangerous part of the undertaking, for a
slight sound might bring out the ruffians, who would probably shoot
without much hesitation.  Maurice took off his snowshoes, and carrying
the fumigator, plunged through the drifts toward the cabin.

Twenty yards away the party watched him from the thickets; Horace kept
the door covered with his rifle.  The snow had drifted so deep that
Maurice climbed easily to the roof, crawled up the slope on hands and
knees, groped about, and began to scrape away the snow.

A moment later, he drew out the deer-hide patch, peered down the hole,
and then waved his hand reassuringly toward the woods.  He struck a
match, lighted the spirit lamp, and then lowered the can cautiously by
a string about a yard long.

In another minute he was back with his friends.  "They're dead asleep,"
he said, joyfully.  "I could hear them snore.  The formaldehyde began
to smell strong before I let it down.  How long shall we leave it?"

"We don't want to kill them," said Horace.

"No danger," Peter remarked.  "The draft from the big chimney will keep
clearing the air.  I'd leave it till all the stuff is vaporized--say, a
couple of hours.  The only thing I dread is that some one may wake up;
but then, he wouldn't know what the smell was, and the spirit flame is
so pale that it's almost invisible."

They watched the cabin intently.  All remained deathly quiet.  It was
very cold as they crouched there in the snow.  Horace kept his rifle
ready, but finally his vigilance slackened.  They walked about to keep
from freezing, talked in whispers, and still watched the silent hut.

Suddenly Horace clutched Fred's arm.

"Look!" he cried.  "The cabin's on fire!"




CHAPTER VIII

A thin stream of smoke was rising from the hole in the roof of the
cabin.  From the chimney volumes of vapor had suddenly begun to pour
out into the moonlight.  The dim glow at the window now and then flared
up brightly.

"That spirit lamp must have set fire to something.  Those men will be
burned to death.  Come, we must try to get them out!" Horace cried.

They rushed together to the cabin door.  It was barricaded on the
inside; they battered it with kicks and blows for a good half-minute,
and at last it yielded.

A gush of smoke and suffocating fumes burst out into their faces, and
the boys staggered back.  The inside of the cabin appeared to be all in
flames, but it was so obscured by smoke that they could see nothing
clearly.

With the opening of the door the fire seemed to burn more fiercely.  It
seemed impossible that anything could be alive in that place; but Fred
shut his eyes and dashed blindly in.

He stumbled over the body of a dog, and kicked it outside the door.
Choking with the smoke and the formaldehyde fumes, he took another
step, and his foot struck something soft; it was the body of a man.

Fred stooped and tried to pick the body up by the shoulders.  Suddenly
through the smoke Peter appeared at his side, and helped him; together
they got the man out and laid him down on the snow.  He was one of the
French Canadians, apparently lifeless.

"Is he dead?" gasped Fred to Macgregor, who bent over the prostrate
form.

The medical student peered under the man's eyelids, and felt his wrist.
"No," he said, "he'll come round all right in the fresh air.  It's the
smoke more than the gas."

Horace came out at that moment, dragging Mitchell's limp body.  The
red-bearded ruffian was alive, but unconscious; the boys placed him on
the snow beside his companion.  Then all four of them rushed into the
cabin together, and succeeded in getting out the remaining two French
Canadians.

"Now the dogs!  We must get them out!" cried Peter.  That was not hard
to do, for the animals were lying close to the door.

The strong draft from the door to the chimney had by this time cleared
the atmosphere a good deal, and the boys saw that the fire was burning
chiefly among the couches of balsam boughs.  The spirit lamp must have
scorched through the cord by which it hung, and dropped into a heap of
dry twigs.

The boys had no means of putting the fire out; the immediate need was
to rescue the provisions.  They rushed in again, and each dragged out
an armful of supplies.  They took a breath of fresh air, and then
hastened in again.  Fred was reaching for a slab of bacon, when
suddenly something exploded almost under his hand.

He jumped back, almost fancying he had been shot at.  _Crack! crack!
bang!_ went several other reports in quick succession, and this time he
realized what it must be.

"Run!  The ammunition's going off!" he shouted, and rushed for the
open; as he ran, however, he caught up the piece of bacon.

Some of the rifle cartridges were exploding, one by one, and then two
or three together, and suddenly, with a tremendous bang, a whole box
seemed to go off.

Then the firing ceased, and after a short interval, the boys set to
work again to get out more provisions.  The cabin was stifling now from
powder smoke, but they got what they could lay their hands on--a bag of
flour, a quantity of canned stuff, a kettle, a rifle; soon a great heap
of rescued supplies lay on the snow outside.

The flames, unable to ignite the solid logs of the cabin, were now
dying; evidently they would soon burn themselves out.

Mitchell at this moment gave signs of returning life.  He opened his
eyes, stirred, and began to cough violently.  They placed him in a more
comfortable position, and at the same time took the precaution of tying
his wrists and ankles securely with strips of deer-hide.  The man
seemed dazed; he looked at the boys in amazement, and did not utter a
word.

Two of the French Canadians were also reviving, and the boys tied them
up in the same way.  The fourth was in bad shape, and it took vigorous
rubbing to restore him to consciousness: if he had been neglected a
little longer he might have died.

They laid the captives out in a row on a pile of hemlock branches, and
lighted a roaring fire to keep them from freezing.  Horace then went
through Mitchell's pockets, and recovered the sack of stones that Fred
had seen.  He poured the glittering crystals into his hand, while
Mitchell looked on in black disappointment.

"My friend," said Horace, "you've taken a vast amount of trouble,
risked committing murder, and almost lost your own life for these
pebbles.  Here, I'll give them to you."  He poured the crystals back
into the pouch, and then flung the sack into the man's lap.

[Illustration: FLUNG THE SACK INTO THE MAN'S LAP]

The outlaw looked utterly bewildered.

"Ain't them diamonds?" he exclaimed.

"Fool's diamonds," Horace replied.  "Maybe you can get five dollars for
the lot.  If they were real diamonds, you might be a millionaire now."

Mitchell was evidently convinced, for he swore bitterly.

"I'm curious to know," Horace said, "how you came to hear that you
might expect to find diamonds hereabouts?"

"One of these breeds," said Mitchell sullenly, "got it from a brother
of his down by Hickson that a prospector had died here with a pocketful
of shiny stones that he'd picked up.  I've prospected some myself.  I
thought what these stones likely was, and I got together this crowd,
and--"

"We know the rest," said Peter.  "You came on the same false scent that
we did."  Then he turned to Horace, and whispered, "What in the world
are we going to do with these fellows?"

Horace wrinkled his brows in perplexity, and shook his head.  "I don't
know," he said.

But whatever they did, they must first of all sleep.  The fire in the
cabin had indeed burned out, but the place was so charred and smoky as
to be uninhabitable; so they built a huge camp-fire of logs on the
snow.  Here they all passed the night,--there was not much left of
it,--and Peter, Fred, and Maurice took turns in staying awake in order
to watch the prisoners.

The next morning the boys prepared a great breakfast from the
recaptured provisions.  They released the right hands of the captives,
to enable them to eat; the men showed no hostile spirit.  Mitchell only
was sullen, as usual; the three French Canadians chattered gayly; they
had quite recovered from their suffocation.  Four of the dogs were
lively, too; but one was dead.

After breakfast the boys inspected the cabin, and carried out the rest
of the supplies.  Most of these were badly damaged.  All the blankets
had been destroyed; the rifles were charred about the stocks, but could
still be used; the kettles and tinware were not much injured; but the
boys found only one box of cartridges that had not exploded.
Mitchell's dog harness was burned to pieces.  Both the sledges had been
left outdoors, and were unhurt.

As they looked over the outfit, the boys discussed their plans.  They
agreed that they should start for home at once.  They were all anxious
to have the diamonds appraised, and there was not the slightest reason
for remaining.  But the question what to do with the prisoners
perplexed them.  They could not take them along, could not leave them
bound, and did not dare to set them free and restore their weapons.

Finally, however, the boys found a way out of the difficulty.  They
divided the provisions and ammunition into two equal parts, and loaded
their toboggan with one of them.  Peter then cut the four men loose.

"We'll treat you better than you did us," he said.  "We're leaving you
half the grub, and there are some old deerskins here from which you can
make a new dog harness.  We'll carry your snowshoes with us for two
miles down the river, and leave them there.  We'll carry your rifles
three miles farther, and leave them in a conspicuous place, too."

Then the boys set out on their homeward journey.  One of the Frenchmen
immediately started after them in order to pick up the snowshoes and
the rifles, but the boys soon left him far behind.  They saw no more of
any of the outlaw gang, although, for fear of an attack, they kept
watch for the next two nights in camp.

None of the boys were in condition for fast travel, and the question of
supplies was a serious one.  Horace thought it best to make straight
for the lumber camp where he had been so kindly received, and they
reached it on the third day.  Here they spent a couple of days in rest
and recuperation, and were lucky enough to be able to buy enough beans,
flour, and bacon to last them to the railway.  Again they set off, and,
after four days of hard tramping in bitter cold weather, they heard the
whistle of a train, faint and far away through the trees.

They all yelled with joy.  It was like a voice from home.  They began
to run, and in a short time they came to iron rails running north and
south through the snowy forest.  Following up the line, they found
themselves at Ringwood, three stations north of Waverley, where they
had gone in.

The next train took them down to that point, and they went back to the
hotel, recovered their suit-cases, and put on town clothes again.  It
seemed a long time since they had passed that way before, and collars
and cuffs were hard to wear.  A great many curious eyes followed them
about the little hotel.

"Find any gold?" the landlord asked them, in an offhand manner.

"No," said Maurice.  If he had inquired about diamonds, the boys would
have been puzzled what to say.

For the last time they packed their dunnage sacks on the battered
toboggan, and shipped it to the city.  They traveled on the same train
themselves, and were in Toronto the next morning.

The boys parted with hearty farewells--Maurice going home, Macgregor to
his rooms, and Horace accompanying Fred to his boarding-house, where he
intended to find quarters for himself.

"And now for the great question!" said Horace, when they were once
indoors.  "Are the diamonds worth anything, or are they not?  I can't
think of anything else till I find out."

"Why, I thought you were sure--" began Fred.

"So I am--in a general sort of way.  But I'm not a diamond expert, and
I may be deceived.  It's just possible that the things may not be real
diamonds at all.

"But don't worry," he added, seeing his brother's startled face.  "I'm
pretty sure they 're all right.  But I'm going to take them at once to
Wilson & Keith's and get them appraised.  They're the best diamond firm
in the city, and they'll treat me honestly."

Horace dressed himself very carefully, took his little sack of jewels,
and departed.  He was gone fully three hours, and Fred waited in almost
sickening impatience.  At last he heard Horace's step on the stairs,
and rushed out to meet him.

"What luck?" he cried eagerly.

"S-sh!" said Horace, drawing him back into the room.  "It's all right.
They're diamonds!"

"Hurrah!" Fred shouted wildly.

"They were awfully keen to know where I got them, but of course I
wouldn't tell, except that it was in Ontario.  They would have bought
the lot, I think, but I wasn't anxious to sell at once.  They wanted me
to make a price, and I wanted them to make an offer, and both of us
were afraid, I guess.  However, they're going to take care of the
stones for me and think it over."

"We must tell the other boys!" exclaimed Fred.  "Can you make the
slightest guess at what the stones are worth?"

"Hardly--at present.  Maybe a thousand or two.  Three of them are too
small to be of any use at all, too small to be cut.  The biggest has a
bad flaw in it; it could be used only for cutting up into what they
call 'commercial diamonds,' for watch-movements, and such things.  Yes,
give Peter and Maurice the news, certainly, but do it by word of mouth.
Don't 'phone them.  You don't know who may be listening.

"And be sure to warn them to keep the whole affair the closest kind of
secret.  Wilson & Keith are going to exhibit the stones in their show
window, and you've no idea what an excitement will be stirred up.
We'll all be watched.  People will try in every possible way to find
out where we got them.  The newspapers will be after the story, and
there'll be all kinds of underhand tricks to trap us into letting out
something.  Not that it would do much good, for none of you know enough
to be dangerous, but we don't want a dozen parties going up the
Nottaway River next spring.  We 're going there ourselves."

Fred promised secrecy, and presently found that his brother had hardly
exaggerated the sensation caused by the little pile of dull stones on a
square of black velvet in the jeweler's window, labeled "Canadian
Diamonds."  The newspapers were unremitting; Horace gave them a brief
and circumspect interview, and thenceforth refused to add another word
to his statement.  He was besieged with inquiries.  He had all sorts of
proposals made to him by miners and mining firms.  One group of
capitalists made him an offer that he thought good enough to consider
for a day, but he ultimately rejected it.

Fred had his share of glory too, as the brother of the diamond finder.
It leaked out that Maurice and Peter had also been on the expedition,
and they were so pestered with inquiries and interviewers that it
seriously interfered with their collegiate work.  But by degrees the
excitement wore off, for lack of anything further to feed upon.  The
diamonds were withdrawn from exhibition, and the jewelers at last made
up their minds to offer Horace seven hundred dollars for the lot.

It was rather a disappointing figure.  Horace took his diamonds to
Montreal and submitted them to two jewel experts there, who advised him
that they were probably worth little more, in their uncut form.  The
cutting of them might develop flaws, or it might bring out unexpected
luster; it was taking a chance.

Returning to Toronto, he announced that he would take eight hundred and
no less; and after some arguing Wilson & Keith consented to pay that
price.  The boys had a grand dinner at a downtown restaurant that night
to celebrate it.  It was far from the fortune they had hoped to gain,
but they still had great hopes of discovering that fortune.

"It's more than enough to cover the expenses of your trip into the
woods this winter, and our next trip in the spring, too," said Horace,
"for of course this eight hundred is going to be divided equally
between us."




"Not a bit of it!" protested Mac.  "You found the stones.  They're
yours.  We won't take a cent of it, will we, Maurice?"

"I should think not!" Maurice exclaimed.

Horace tried to insist, but the two boys stood firm.  At last he
persuaded them to agree that the expenses of the expedition should be
defrayed out of the diamond money.  As for their coming trip next
season, the matter was left to be settled later.

There was plenty of time to think of it, for it would be months before
the woods would be open for prospecting.




CHAPTER IX

Nearly the whole winter was before them, but it was none too long a
time to consider their plans.  Horace had found diamonds, it is true,
but they had been found miles apart, one at a time, in the river
gravel.  This is not the natural home of diamonds, which are always
found native to the peculiar formation known in South Africa as "blue
clay."  Nobody had ever found a trace of blue clay in Ontario, yet
Horace felt certain that the blue-clay beds must exist.  They were the
only thing worth looking for.  To poke over the river gravel in hopes
of finding a chance stone would be sheer waste of time.  Hundreds of
men had done it without lighting on a single diamond.

Horace was a trained geologist, and that winter he spent much time in
study, without saying a word even to Fred as to what he was meditating.
He pored over geological surveys, and went to Ottawa to consult the
departmental maps at the Legislative Library.  By slow degrees he was
working out a theory, and at last, one February evening, he came into
his brother's room.

"Just look at this, Fred, and see what you think of it," he remarked
casually.

It was a large pen-and-ink map, skillfully drawn, for Horace was a
practiced map-maker.

"It's the country of the Abitibi and Missanabie Rivers," Horace
explained.  "These red crosses show where I found my diamonds--see, in
the Whitefish River, the Smoke River, and another river that hasn't any
name, so far as I know.  Right here is the trappers' cabin where you
boys found me.  My bones might have been up there now but for you, old
boy!"

And he thumped Fred's back affectionately.

"If you hadn't come along when you did I'm pretty certain our bones
would be there, anyway," said Fred.

"Well, let's hope we all saved one another.  But see, most of these
diamonds were found many miles apart.  They didn't grow where I found
them.  They must have been washed down, perhaps from the very
headwaters of the river.  Now look at the map.  Do you see, all these
three rivers rise in pretty much the same region."

"So they do," said Fred, his eyes fixed on the paper.  "Then you
think--"

"The stones were probably all washed down from that region.  The
blue-clay beds, the diamond field, must be up there, somewhere within
this black circle I've drawn."

Fred's heart began to throb with excitement.

"But some prospector would have hit on them before now," he said.

"I doubt if any prospector has ever gone in there.  They say it's one
of the roughest bits of country in the North, and no mineral strikes
have ever been made in that region.  I've never been up there myself.
It's up in the hills, you see; the rivers are too broken for a canoe,
and the ground is too rough to get over on foot, except in the winter.
The Ojibwas hunt there in the winter, they say, and I dare say there's
plenty of game."

"But if it's so rough to get into, how can we travel?"

"Oh, often those bad places are not so bad when you get there.  I'd
like to see the place I couldn't get into if there were diamonds there!
We'll get into it somehow, for the diamond-beds must surely be there if
they're anywhere.  But there's no doubt it'll be a rough trip."

"Rough?  What of that?" cried Fred.  "If your theory is right we'll
make our fortunes--millions, maybe!  Of course you'll let me go, won't
you?  And Maurice, and Mac?"

"I couldn't manage without you.  But mind, not a word to anybody else!"

They telephoned the other boys that day, and in the evening a meeting
was held in Fred's room, like the previous time when the first
expedition had been so hurriedly planned.  But this was to be a
different affair, carefully thought out and equipped for all sorts of
possibilities.

"Of course you'll both be able to go?" said Fred.

"I certainly will," answered Peter.  "I've lost so much time this
winter already, with our other trip, and then having my mind on the
diamonds and dodging newspaper reporters and things, that I've got
hopelessly behind.  My laboratory work especially has gone all to
pieces.  I'm bound to fail on next summer's exams, anyway, so I'm going
to let it slide and make the trip, on the chance that I'll make such a
fortune that I won't have to practice medicine for a living at all.
How about you, Maurice?"

"I wouldn't miss it for anything--if I could help it," Maurice replied.
"I don't know, though, whether I can afford it."

Maurice's parents were not in rich circumstances, and Horace hastened
to say--

"I'm paying for this expedition, you know, out of the diamond money.
There'll be plenty, and some to spare."

"Well, it isn't exactly the cost," said Maurice, "but my father is
awfully anxious for me to make an honor pass next summer.  I couldn't
afford to fail, and have to take another year at the work.  I don't
know, though,--I'll see.  I'd be awfully disappointed if I had to stay
out of it."

Under the circumstances they could not urge him to say more.  As for
Horace and Fred, they had very few family ties.  Their closest
relatives were an aunt and uncle in Montreal.  The trip was quite in
the line of Horace's profession, and Fred did not mind resigning the
post he held in the real estate office.  The firm was shaky; it was not
likely to continue in business much longer, and he would be likely to
have to look for another position soon in any event.  As they had
feared, Maurice was obliged to announce his inability to go with them.
His professors thought that an absence of two months would be a
handicap that he could never make up.  In the eyes of his parents the
expedition was no more than a hare-brained expedition into the woods,
that would cost a whole year of collegiate work.  To his bitter
disappointment, he had to give it up.

Fred and Macgregor at once began to train as if for an athletic
contest.  They took long cross-country runs in the snow and worked hard
in the gymnasium.  They introduced a new form of exercise that made
their friends stare.  They appeared on the indoor running track bent
almost double; each carried on his back a sack of sawdust, held in
place by a broad leather band that passed over the top of his forehead.
Thus burdened they jogged round the track at a fast walk.

They were the butt of many jokes before the other men at the gymnasium
discovered the reason for this queer form of exercise.  It had been
Horace's idea.  He knew that there would be long portages where they
would have to carry the supplies with a tumpline; and he also knew that
nothing is so wearing on a novice.

Fred and Peter found it so.  Strong as they were, they discovered that
it brought a new set of muscles into play, and they had trouble in
staggering over a mile with a fifty-pound pack; but they kept at it,
and before the expedition started, Fred could travel five miles with a
hundred pounds, and big Macgregor could do even better.

As soon as the ice on Toronto Bay broke up, they bought a large
Peterboro canoe, which Horace inspected thoroughly.  He was a skilled
canoeman; Fred and Peter could also handle a paddle.  When the ice went
out of the Don and Humber Rivers, the boys began to practice canoeing
assiduously.  The streams were running yellow and flooded, and they got
more than one ducking, but it was all good training.

They decided to start as soon as the Northern rivers were navigable,
for at that early season they would escape the worst of the black-fly
pest, and the smaller streams would be more easily traveled than when
shallow in midsummer.  Besides, they all felt anxious to get on the
ground at once.  But although the streams were free in Toronto, in the
Far North winter held them locked.  It was hard to wait; but not until
May did Horace think it safe to start.

Since Maurice was not going, the boys decided to take only one canoe.
It was impossible to say how long they might be gone, but Horace made
out a list of supplies for six weeks.  It was rather a formidable list,
and the outfit would be heavy to transport.  They carried a tent and
mosquito-bar, and a light spade and pick for prospecting the blue clay,
besides Horace's own regular outfit for mineralogical testing work.
For weapons they decided upon a 44-caliber repeating rifle and a
shotgun, with assorted loads of shells.  It was not the season for
hunting, but they wished to live on the country as far as possible to
save their flour and pork.  Fish should be abundant, however, and they
took a steel rod with a varied stock of artificial flies and
minnow-baits.

It was warm weather, almost summery, when they took the northbound
express in Toronto; but when Fred opened the car window the next
morning, a biting cold air rushed in.  Rough spruce woods lined the
track, and here and there he saw patches of snow.

It was almost noon when they got off at the station that was a favorite
starting-point for prospectors.  Here they had to spend two days, for
Horace wished to engage Indian packers to help them portage over the
Height of Land.  As it was early in the season, they had their pick of
men, and obtained three French half-breeds, who furnished their own
canoe and supplies.

The boys' canoe and duffel sacks had come up by freight.  All was ready
at last.  The next morning they put the canoes into the water; the
paddles dipped, and the half-dozen houses of the village dropped out of
sight behind the pines.

The first week of that voyage was uneventful, except for hard work and
considerable discomfort.  It rained four days in the seven, and once it
snowed a little.  They were going upstream always, against a rushing
current swollen with snow water.  Sometimes they could paddle, more
often they had to pole, and frequently they were forced either to
carry, or else to wade and "track" the canoes up the current.  The
nearer they came to the head of the river, the swifter and more broken
the stream became.  At last they could go no farther in the canoes.
Then came the long portage.  In order to reach the head of the
Missanabie River, which flowed in the opposite direction, they had to
carry the canoe and over six hundred pounds of outfit for about twelve
miles, across the Height of Land.

Here they camped for one night.  At daylight next morning they started
over the long portage, heavily burdened, and before the first hour had
passed they were thankful that they had brought along the half-breed
packers, who strode along sturdily under a load that made Fred stare.
It is only fair to say, though, that the half-breeds were almost
equally surprised at the performance of the boys, for their previous
experience with city campers had not led them to expect anything in the
way of weight-carrying.  Thanks to their gymnasium practice, however,
Fred and Macgregor were able to travel under a sixty-pound load without
actually collapsing.

The trail was rough and wound up and down over rocky ridges, through
tangles of swamp-alder and tamarack, but continually zigzagged up
toward the hills.  It was a chilly day; the streams had been rimmed
with ice that morning, but after a few miles the boys were dripping
with perspiration.

That was a killing march.  If it had not been for their weeks of hard
training the boys could never have stood up under it, and they had all
they could do to reach the topmost ridge of the Height of Land by the
middle of the afternoon.

Fred slipped the tumpline from his head, slung the sixty-pound pack on
the ground, and sat down heavily on the pack.

"That part's over, anyway!" he gasped.

"There won't be anything much rougher, old boy," replied Horace, as he
came up and threw off his own burden.

Staggering through the underbrush, slipping on the wet, mossy stones of
the slope, came a queer procession.  In front was a bronze-faced
half-breed, bent double, with the broad tump-line over the top of his
head, and a mountainous pack of blankets and food supplies on his back.
Behind him came two more half-breeds, each with a heavy pack of camp
outfit.  Macgregor brought up the rear; he carried a Peterboro canoe
upside down on his shoulders, and steadied it with his hands.

They all sat down on the top of the hill to rest.  The three white
boys, although trained athletes, were pretty well at the end of their
strength; but the half-breeds seemed little the worse for their labor.

They were on the top of the Height of Land, which divides the flow of
the rivers between the Great Lakes and Hudson Bay.  Behind them was the
long, undulating line of hills and valleys they had just crossed.

Before them the land fell away sharply.  In the clear May sunshine they
could see for miles over the tree-tops until the dark green of the
spruce and tamarack faded to a hazy blue.  A great ridge showed a split
face of gray granite; in the distance a lake glimmered.

About two miles away to the northwest a yellowish-green strip showed
here and there through the trees.  It was a river--one of the
tributaries of the Missanabie, which was to take them North.

The descent on the other side of the ridge was almost as hard as the
ascent had been.  The northern slope was wet and rocky; in the hollows
were deep banks of snow.  The rocks were loosened by the frost, which
made the footing dangerous.  But it was only two miles now to the
river, and they reached it in time to camp before dusk.  The next
morning they paid off the half-breeds, who returned over the ridges
southward.  The boys were left alone; the real expedition had begun.

The work now looked easy, but dangerous.  The river was narrow,
swollen; its tremendous current, roaring over rocks and rapids, would
carry them along at a rapid pace.  They would have to do some careful
steering, however, if they did not wish to upset.

As the most skillful canoeman, Horace took the stern; Macgregor sat in
the bow, and Fred in the middle behind a huge pile of dunnage.

For a quarter of a mile they shot down the river; then they had to land
and make a fifty-yard carry.  Another swift run in the canoe followed,
and then another and longer portage.

It was like that for about fifteen miles.  Then they caught sight of
wider water ahead, and the little river poured into a great, brown,
swift-flowing stream a hundred yards wide.  It was the Missanabie.

During the rest of that day they ran over forty miles.  The current
carried them fast, and the river was so big and deep that it was seldom
broken by dangerous rapids.

The country grew lower and less hilly; it was covered with a rather
stunted growth of spruce, tamarack, and birch.  Ducks splashed up from
the water as the canoe came in sight; and when the boys stopped to make
camp for the night they found at the river's edge the tracks of a moose.

It was wintry cold in camp that night, and there was ice in the pools
the next morning.  Shortly after sunrise the boys launched the canoe
again, and it was not much more than an hour later when a sound of
roaring water began to grow loud in their ears.  With vast commotion
and foam a smaller stream swept into the Missanabie from the southwest.

"Hurrah!  I've been here before!" cried Horace.  "It's the Smoke River.
Up here real work begins."

"And up here," Peter said, gazing at the wild, swift stream, "is the
diamond country."




CHAPTER X

The mouth of the Smoke River was so rough that the boys could not enter
it in the canoe; and the dense growth of birch and willow along the
shores would make portaging difficult.

"We'll have to track the canoe up," Horace decided.

They got out the "tracking-line"--a long, stout, half-inch rope--and
attached one end of it to the bow of the canoe.  Peter Macgregor
harnessed himself to the other end, and started up the narrow, rocky
strip of shore; Horace waded beside the canoe in order to fend her off
the boulders.  Fred, carrying the fire-arms and a few other articles
that a wetting would have ruined, scrambled through the thickets.

The water was icy cold, but it was never more than hip-deep.
Fortunately, the very broken stretch of the river was only a hundred
yards long; after that, they were able to pole for a mile or so, and
once indeed, the stream broadened so much that they could use the
paddles.  Then came a precipitous cascade, then a difficult carry, and
then another stretch of poling.

They had gone about five miles up the river when Horace, who had been
watching the shores carefully, pointed to a tree and gave a shout.  It
was a large spruce, on the trunk of which was a blazed mark that looked
less than a year old.

"It's my mark," said Horace.  "I made it last August.  Right here I
found one of the diamonds."

"We must stop and do some prospecting!" cried Fred.

"No use," replied his brother.  "I prospected all round here myself,
and for a mile or so up the river.  I didn't go any farther, but I've a
notion that we'll have to go nearly to the head of the river to find
the country we want."

On they went, shoving the canoe against the current with the iron-shod
canoe poles.  They had all been looking up the kind of soil in which
diamonds are usually found, and now they closely observed the eroded
banks on both sides of the river.  According to Horace's theory, the
river, or one of its tributary streams, must cut through the
diamond-beds of blue clay.  But as yet the shores showed nothing except
ordinary sand and gravel.

Two miles farther the river broadened into a long, narrow lake,
surrounded by low spruce-clad hills and edged with sprouting lily-pads.
It was a great relief to the boys to be able to paddle, and they dashed
rapidly to the head of the lake.  There, rapids and a long carry
confronted them!  They had made little more than fifteen miles that day
when finally they went into camp; they were almost too tired to cook
supper.  And they knew that that day's work was only a foretaste of
what was coming, for from now on they would be continually "bucking the
rapids."

The next day they found rapids in plenty, indeed.  They seemed to come
on an average of a quarter of a mile apart, and sometimes two or three
in such close succession that it was scarcely worth while to launch the
canoe again after the first portage.  It was slow, toilsome work; they
grew very tired as the afternoon wore on, and shortly before sunset
they came to one of the worst spots they had yet encountered.

It was a pair of rapids, less than a hundred yards apart.  Over the
first one the water rushed among a medley of irregular boulders, and
then, after some ten rods of smooth, swift current, poured down a
cataract of several feet.  Huge black rocks, split and tumbled, broke
up the cataract, and the hoarse roar filled the pine woods with sound.

"I move we camp!" said Fred, eyeing this obstacle with disgust.

"Let's get over the carry first and camp at the top," Peter urged.
"Then we'll have a clear start for morning."

Fred grumbled that they would certainly be fresher in the morning than
they were then, but they unpacked the canoe, and began to carry the
outfit around the broken water, as they had done so many tunes that
day.  Once at the head of the upper rapid Horace began to get out the
cooking-utensils.

"I'll start supper," he said.  "You fellows might see if you can't land
a few trout.  There ought to be big fellows between these two cascades."

It did look a good place for trout, and Mac had an appetite for fishing
that no fatigue could stifle.  He took the steel fly-rod, and walked a
little way down the stream past the upper rapid.  Fred cut a long,
slender pole, tied a line to it and prepared to fish in a less
scientific fashion.  As his rod and line were considerably shorter than
Mac's, he got into the canoe, put a loop of the tracking-rope around a
rock, and let himself drift for the length of the rope, nearly to the
edge of the rough water.  Hung in this rather precarious position, he
was able to throw his hook into the foamy water just at the foot of the
fall, and had a bite almost instantly, throwing out a good half-pound
fish whose orange spots glittered in the sunlight.

Peter meanwhile was fishing from the shore lower down.  The thickets
were farther back from the water than usual, and he had plenty of room
for the back cast.  He was kept busy from the first, and when he had
time to glance up Fred seemed to be having equally good luck.

But at one of these hurried glances his eye caught something that
appalled him.  The looped rope that held the straining canoe seemed to
be in danger of slipping from its hold on the rock.

He shouted, but the roar of the water drowned his voice.  He started up
the bank, shouting and gesticulating, but Fred was busy with a fish and
did not hear or see.  Horace was cutting wood at a distance.  And at
that moment the rope slipped free.  The canoe shot forward, and before
Fred could even drop his rod he was whirled broadside on into the rapid.

Instantly the canoe capsized.  Fred went out of sight in the foam and
water, and then Macgregor saw him floating down on the current below
the rapid.  He was on his back, with his face just above water, and he
did not move a limb.

Mac yelled at him, but got no answer.  Fred had not been under long
enough to be drowned.  He had evidently been stunned by striking his
head against a rock.

Then Mac realized the boy's new and greater danger.  Fred was drifting
rapidly head first toward the second cataract, and no one could dive
over that fall and live.  The rocks at the bottom would brain the
strongest swimmer.

Mac instinctively dropped his rod and rushed into the water.  The
strength of the swirling current almost swept him off his feet.  It was
too deep to wade, and he was not a good swimmer.  He could never reach
Fred in time.  They would go over the fall together.

Fred was more than thirty feet from shore.  Mac thought of a long pole,
and splashed madly ashore again.  He caught sight of his fishing-rod,
with its hundred yards of strong silk line on the reel.

Fred was now about twenty yards above the cascade when Mac ran into the
river again, rod in hand, as far as he dared to wade.  He measured the
distance with his eye, reeled out the line, waving the rod in the air,
and then, with a turn of his wrist, the delicate rod shot the pair of
flies across the water.

Mac was an expert fly-caster.  The difficulty was not in the length of
the cast; it was to hook the flies in Fred's clothing.  They fell a
yard beyond the boy's body.  Mac drew them in.  The hooks seemed to
catch for an instant on his chest, but came free at the first tug.

Desperately Mac swished the flies out of the water for another cast.
He saw that he would have time to throw but this once more, for Fred
was terribly near the cataract, and moving faster as the pull of the
current quickened.  Mac waded a little farther into the stream, leaning
against the current to keep his balance.

The line whirled again, and shot out, and again the gut fell across
Fred's shoulders with the flies on the other side.  With the greatest
care Mac drew in the line.  The first fly dragged over the body as
before.  The other caught, broke loose, and caught again in Fred's coat
near the collar, and then the steel rod bent with the sudden strain of
a hundred and fifty pounds drawn down by the strong current.

Mac knew that the rod was almost unbreakable, but he feared for his
line.  The current pulled so hard that he dared not exert much force.
Fred's body swung round with his head upstream, his feet toward the
cataract, and the current split and ripped in spray over his head.

The lithe steel rod bent hoop-like.  There was a struggle for a moment,
a deadlock between the stream and the line, and Mac feared that he
could not hold it.  The light tackle would never stand the strain.

Mac had fought big fishes before, however, and he knew how to get the
most out of his tackle.  With the check on the reel he let out line
inch by inch to ease the resistance; and meanwhile he endeavored to
swing Fred across the current and nearer the shore.

As he stood with every nerve and muscle strained on the fight he
suddenly saw Horace out of the corner of his eye.  Horace was beside
him, coat and shoes off, with a long hooked pole in his hands, gazing
with compressed lips at his brother's floating body.

There was not a word exchanged.  Under the steady pull Fred came over
in an arc of a circle, but for every foot that was gained Mac had to
let out more line.  His legs were swinging already within a few yards
of the dangerous verge, but he was getting out of the center of the
stream, and the current was already less violent.

Inch by inch and foot by foot he came nearer, and all at once Horace
rushed forward, nearly shoulder-deep, and hooked the pole over his
brother's arm.  At the jerk the gut casting-line snapped with a crack,
and the end flew back like a whip into Peter's face.  But Horace had
drawn Fred within reach, had gripped him, and waded ashore carrying him
in his arms.

"I'll never forget this of you, Mac!" he ejaculated as he passed the
medical student.

Fred had already come half to himself when they laid him on the bank.
He had not swallowed much water, but had been merely knocked senseless
by concussion with a boulder.

"What's--matter?" he muttered faintly, opening his eyes.

"Keep quiet.  You fell in the river.  Mac fished you out," said Horace.

Fred blinked about vaguely, half-attempted to rise and fell back.

"Gracious!  What a head I've got!" he muttered dizzily.

They carried him up to the camp, put him on the blankets and examined
his cranium.  The back of his neck was skinned, there was a bleeding
cut on the top of his head and a big bruise on the back, but Mac
pronounced none of these injuries at all serious.  While they were
examining him Fred opened his eyes again.

"Fished me out, Mac?  Guess you saved my life," he murmured.

"That's all right, old fellow," replied Peter; and then he gave a
sudden start.

"The canoe!"

In the excitement over Fred's rescue they had entirely forgotten it.
It had drifted downstream.  If lost or destroyed they would be left
stranded in the wilderness--almost as hopelessly as castaways at sea.

Without another word Mac began to run at full speed down the bank in
the deepening twilight.  If the canoe had drifted right down the
stream, he might never have overtaken it, but luckily he came upon it
within a mile, lying stranded and capsized.  By the greatest good luck,
too, it was not ruined.  It had several bruises and a strip of the rail
was split off, but it was still water-tight.

The next morning Fred was fairly recovered of his hurts, but felt weak
and dizzy, so that not much progress was made.  During the whole
forenoon they remained in camp.  Horace went hunting with the shotgun
and got a couple of ducks.  None of them felt much inclined for any
more fishing in that almost fatal spot.

On the following day, however, Fred was able to take his share of the
work again, and the party proceeded.  That day and many days after were
much alike.  They tracked the canoe up long stretches of rough water,
where two of them had to wade alongside in order to keep it from going
over.  They made back-breaking portages over places where they had to
hew out a trail for a quarter of a mile.  At night when they rolled
themselves into their blankets they were too tired to talk.  But the
hard training they had undergone before they started showed its results
now.  Although they were dead tired at night, they were always ready
for the day's work in the morning.  They suffered no ill effects from
their wettings in the river, and their appetites were enormous.

The supplies, especially of bacon and flour, decreased alarmingly.
Although signs of game were abundant, they did not like to lose time in
hunting until they reached the prospecting grounds; but a couple of
days later meat came to them.  They had reached the foot of the worst
rapid they had yet encountered.  It was a veritable cascade, for the
river, narrowing between walls of rock, leaped and roared over fifty
yards of boulders.  The portage led up a rather steep slope.  The three
boys, each heavily burdened, were struggling along in single file, when
Horace, who was in front, suddenly sank flat, and with his hand
cautioned the others to be silent.

"S-s-h!  Lie low!" he whispered.  "Give me the rifle!"

Macgregor passed the weapon to him, and then he and Fred wriggled
forward to look.

Eighty yards away Fred saw the light-brown flank of a doe, and beside
her, partly concealed by the underbrush, the head and large,
questioning ears of a fawn.  The animals were evidently excited, for as
Horace lowered his rifle, not wishing to kill a mother with young, they
bounded a few steps nearer, and stood gazing back at the thicket from
which they had come.  The wind blew toward the boys, and the roar of
the cataract had drowned the noise of their approach.

Suddenly there was a commotion in the thicket, and two young bucks
burst from the spruces and dashed past the doe and fawn toward the
boys.  At the same instant the lithe, tawny form of a lynx leaped out.
It struck like lightning at the fawn, but the little fellow sprang
aside and bounded after its mother.  The lynx gave a few prodigious
leaps and then stood, with tufted ears erect, glaring in
disappointment.  It had all happened within a few seconds, and the deer
were disappearing behind some rocks and stunted spruces fifty yards to
the right before the boys thought again of their need of meat.

At that moment, one of the bucks wheeled at the edge of the tangle
behind which the other deer had passed.  For an instant he presented a
fair quartering shot.

"Shoot quick!" whispered Macgregor, excitedly.

As the repeater in Horace's hands cracked, the buck whirled round in a
half-circle, leaped once, and fell.

Fred uttered a wild shout, slipped the tumpline from his head, and ran
forward.  He was carrying the shotgun and held it ready; but the buck,
shot behind the shoulder, was virtually dead, although he was kicking
feebly.

The lynx had vanished; there was no sign of the other deer.  Only the
rush of the water in the river-bed now disturbed the forest stillness.

The dressing of the game was no small task.  It was late in the
afternoon when the boys had finished it and had brought up the rest of
their outfit to the head of the cataract.  "Buck Rapids" they named the
place.  There was enough meat on the deer to last them for the next
week at least.  The slices they cut and fried that night, although not
tender, were palatable and nourishing.

The weather had been warmer that day, and for the first time mosquitoes
troubled them.  The boys slept badly, and got up the next morning
unrefreshed and in no mood to "buck the river" again.

"Why not stop here a couple of days and prospect?" Mac suggested at
breakfast.

The proposal struck them all favorably.  It was the real beginning of
the search for fortune.  Fred in particular was fired with instant
hope, and immediately after breakfast he set out to explore the country
north of the river; he intended to make a wide circle back to the Smoke
River and to come homeward down its bank.  He carried a compass, the
shotgun, and a luncheon of cold flapjacks and fried deer meat.  Horace
went off to the south; Macgregor remained in camp, to jerk the venison
by smoking it over a slow fire.

It was a sunny, warm day.  Spring seemed to have come with a bound, and
the warmth had brought out the black flies in swarms.  All the boys had
smeared themselves that morning with "fly dope" that they had bought at
the railway station, but even that black, ill-smelling varnish on their
hands and faces was only partly effectual.  Great clouds of the little
pests hovered round them.

Fred struck straight north from the river, and then turned a little to
the west.  He examined the ground with the utmost care.  The land lay
in great ridges and valleys, and he soon found that prospecting was
almost as rough work as fighting the river.  In the valleys the earth
was mucky with melting snow water; on the hills it was rocky, with huge
boulders, tumbled heaps of shattered stone, slopes of loose gravel;
everywhere was a tangle of stunted, scrubby birch and poplar, spruce
and jack-pine.

After half an hour he came upon a small creek that flowed from the
northwest.  With a glance at his compass, he started to follow it.  For
nearly three hours he plodded along the creek, digging into the banks
with a stick and examining every spot where there seemed a chance of
finding blue clay; but he found nothing except ordinary sand and
gravel.  At last, disappointed and disheartened, he turned back toward
the Smoke River.  After a mile or so he stopped to eat his luncheon,
and built a smudge to keep the flies away; then he proceeded onward
through the rough, unprofitable country.

But if he did not find diamonds, he came on plenty of game.  Ruffed
grouse and spruce partridges rose here and there and perched in the
trees.  He saw many rabbits, and there were signs where deer or moose
had browsed on the birch twigs.  Once, as he came over a ridge, he
caught a glimpse of a black bear digging at a pile of rotten logs in
the valley.  The animal evidently had not been long out of winter
quarters, for it looked starved, and its fur was tattered and rusty.
The moment the bear caught sight of him, it vanished like a dark streak.

Fred found no trace that afternoon of blue clay, or, indeed, of any
clay, but he happened upon something that caused him some apprehension.
It was a steel trap, lying on the open ground, battered and rusted as
if it had been there for some time.  Scattered round it were some bones
that he guessed had belonged to a lynx.  Apparently the animal had been
caught in the trap, which was of the size generally used for martens,
had broken the chain from its fastening, and had traveled until it had
either perished from starvation or had been killed by wolves.

Although rusty, the trap was still in working condition, and Fred,
somewhat uneasy, took it along with him.  Some one had been trapping in
that district recently, perhaps during the last winter; was the
stranger also looking for diamonds?

With frequent glances at his compass Fred kept zigzagging to and fro,
and finally came out on the river again; but he was still a long way
from camp, and he did not reach the head of the cataract until nearly
sunset.

Horace had already come in, covered with mud and swollen with fly bites.

"What luck?" cried Fred, eagerly.

His brother shook his head.  He had encountered the same sort of rough
country as Fred; and to add to his troubles, he had got into a morass,
from which he had escaped in a very muddy condition.

Then Fred produced the trap and told of his finding it and of his
fears.  The boys examined it and tested its springs.  Horace took a
more cheerful view of the matter.

"The Ojibywas always trap through here in the winter," he said.  "The
owner of that trap is probably down at Moose Factory now.  Besides, the
lynx might have traveled twenty or thirty miles from the place where it
was caught."

In spite of the failure of the day's work they all felt hopeful; but
they resolved to push on farther before doing any more prospecting.

The next morning they launched the canoe, and for four days more faced
the river.  Each day the work was harder.  Each day they had a
succession of back-breaking portages; sometimes they were able to pole
a little; they hauled the canoe for hours by the tracking-line, and in
those four days they traveled scarcely thirty miles.

On the last day they met with a serious misfortune.  While they were
hauling the canoe up a rapid the craft narrowly escaped capsizing, and
spilled out a large tin that contained twenty-five pounds of corn meal
and ten pounds of rice--their entire stock.  What was worse, the cover
came off, and the precious contents disappeared in the water.

About fifteen pounds of Graham flour and five pounds of oatmeal were
all the breadstuffs they had left now, and they had to use it most
sparingly.

But they were well within the region where Horace thought that the
diamond-beds must lie.  On the map it had seemed a small area; but now
they realized that it was a huge stretch of tangled wilderness, where a
dozen diamond-beds might defy discovery.  Even Horace, the veteran
prospector, admitted that they had a big job before them.

"However, we'll find the blue clay if it's on the surface--and the
supplies hold out," he said, with determination.

The next morning each of the boys went out in a different direction.
Late in the afternoon they came back, one by one, tired and fly-bitten,
and each with the same failure to report.  The ground was much as they
had found it before, covered with rock and gravel in rolling ridges.
Nowhere had they found the blue clay.

They spent two more days here, working hard from morning to night, with
no success.  The next day they again moved camp a day's journey
upstream; that brought them into the heart of the district from which
they had expected so much.  The river was growing so narrow and so
broken that it would be almost impossible for them to follow it farther
by canoe.  If they pushed on they would have to abandon their craft,
and carry what supplies they could on their backs.

But they intended to spend a week here.  They set out on the diamond
hunt again with fresh energy.  A warm, soft drizzle was falling, which
to some extent kept down the flies.

Horace came back to camp first; he had had no success.  He was trying
to find dry wood to rekindle the fire when he saw Fred coming down the
bank at a run.  The boy's face was aglow.

"Look here, Horace!  What's this?" he asked, as he came up panting.  In
his hand he held a large, wet lump of greenish-blue, clayey mud.
Horace took it, poked into it, and turned it over.  Then he glanced
sympathetically at his brother's face.

"I'm afraid it isn't anything, old boy," he said.  "Only ordinary mud.
The real blue clay is more of a gray blue, you know, and generally as
hard as bricks."

Fred pitched the stuff into the river and said nothing, but his face
showed his disappointment.  He had carried that lump of clay for over
four miles, in the conviction that he had discovered the
diamond-bearing soil.

Macgregor came in shortly afterward with nothing more valuable than two
ducks that he had shot.

The boys were discouraged that evening.  After the rain they could find
little dry wood.  It was nearly dark before Fred began to stir up the
usual pan of flapjacks, and "Mac" set himself to the task of cutting up
one of the ducks to fry.  They were too much depressed to talk, and the
camp was quiet, when suddenly a crackling tread sounded in the
underbrush.

"What's that?" cried Horace sharply.  And as he spoke, a man stepped
out of the shadow, and advanced into the firelight.

"_Bo' soir_!  Hello!" he said, curtly.

"Hello!  Good evening!" cried Fred and Mac, much startled.

"Sit down.  Grub'll be ready in a minute," Horace added.  Hospitality
comes before everything else in the North.

"Had grub," answered the man; but he sat down on a log beside the fire,
and surveyed the whole camp with keen, quick eyes.

All the boys looked at him with much curiosity.  He was apparently of
middle age, with a tangled beard and black hair that straggled down
almost to his shoulders.  He wore moccasins, Mackinaw trousers shiny
with blood and grease, a buckskin jacket, and a flannel shirt.  He was
brown as any Ojibwa, and he, carried a repeating rifle and had a belt
of cartridges at his waist.

"Hunting?" he asked presently, with a nod at the deerskin that was
hanging to dry.

"Now and again," said Horace.

"Well, ye can't hunt here," said the man deliberately, after a pause.
"Don't ye know that this is a Government forest reserve?  No hunters
allowed.  Ye'll have to be out of here by to-morrow."




CHAPTER XI

The boys were thunderstruck at the stranger's assertion.  They knew of
several forest reserves in northern Ontario where timber and game are
closely protected, but they had never heard of one in this district.

"I guess you're wrong," said Horace.  "There isn't any Government
reserve north of Timagami."

"Made last fall," the stranger retorted.  "I ought to know.  I'm one of
the rangers.  We've got a camp up the river, and we've been here all
winter to keep out hunters and lumbermen."

Horace looked at him closely, but said nothing.

"Prospecting's allowed, isn't it?" Fred blurted out.

"Prospect all ye want to, but ye can't stake no claims."

"Where's the limit of this reserve?" asked Mac.

"Ten miles down the river from here.  Ye'll have to be down below there
by to-morrow night.  Or, if ye want to stay, ye'll have to give up your
guns.  No guns allowed here."

"I suppose you've got papers to show your authority?" Mac inquired.

"'Course I have.  They 're back at camp.  Oh, ye'll get all ye want.
Why," pointing to the fresh hide, "ye killed that there deer out of
season.  Ye've got the law agin ye for that."

"It was for our own food.  You can kill deer for necessary supplies."

"Not on this ground.  Now ye can do as ye like--give up your guns till
ye 're ready to leave, or get out right away.  I've warned ye."

The "ranger" got up and glanced round threateningly.

"If you can show us that you're really a Government ranger, we'll go,"
Horace said.  "But I know the Commissioner of Crown Lands; I saw him
before we started, and I didn't hear of any new reserve being made.  I
don't believe in you or your reserve, and we'll stay where we are till
you show us the proof of your authority."

"I'll show you _this_!" exclaimed the man fiercely, slapping the barrel
of his rifle.

"You can't bluff us.  We've got guns, too, if it comes to that!" cried
Fred.

"I've give ye fair warning," repeated the man.  "Ye'll find it mighty
hard to buck agin the Gover'ment, and ye'll be sorry if ye try it.
Ye'll see me again."

Turning, he stepped into the shadows and was gone.  The boys looked at
one another.

"What do you make of it?" Peter asked.  "Is he a ranger--or a
prospector?"

"They don't hire that kind of man for Government rangers," replied
Horace.  "And I'm certain there's no forest reserve here.  Why, there's
no timber worth preserving.  He's a hunter or a prospector, and from
his looks he's evidently been in the woods all winter, as he said.
Perhaps he belongs to a party of prospectors who found a good thing
last fall, and got snowed in before they could get out."

"Hunters wouldn't be so anxious to drive us away," said Fred.  "They
must be prospectors.  Suppose they've found the diamond fields!"

They had all thought of that.  There was a gloomy silence.

"One thing's certain," said Horace, "we must trail those fellows down,
and see what sort of men they are and where they 're camped.  We'll
scout up the river to-morrow."

They all felt nervous and uneasy that evening.  They stayed up late,
and when they went to bed they loaded their guns and laid them close at
hand.

But the night passed without any disturbance, and after breakfast they
set out at once to trail the ranger.  They followed the river for about
four miles, to a point where the stream broke through the hills in a
succession of cascades and rapids; but although they searched all the
landscape with the field-glass from the top of the hills, they saw no
sign of man.  Beyond the ridges, however, the river turned sharply into
a wooded valley.  They struggled through the undergrowth, found another
curve in the river, rounded it--and then stepped hastily back into
cover.

About two hundred yards upstream stood a log hut on the shore, at the
foot of a steep bluff.  A wreath of smoke rose from its chimney, but no
one was in sight.  Talking in low tones, the boys watched it for some
time.  Then they made a detour through the woods, and crept round to
the top of the bluff.  Peering cautiously over the edge, they saw the
cabin below them, not fifty yards away.

It looked like a trappers' winter camp.  It was built of spruce logs,
chinked with mud and moss.  A deep layer of scattered chips beside the
remains of a log pile showed that the place had been used all winter.

Presently a man came out of the door, stretched himself lazily, and
carried a block of wood into the cabin.  It was not the man they had
seen, but a slender, dark fellow, dressed in buckskin, who looked like
a half-breed.  In a moment he came out again, and this time the ranger
came with him.  There was a third man in the cabin, for they could hear
some one speaking from inside the shack.

For some moments the men stood talking; their voices were quite
audible, but the boys could not make out what they were saying.  The
two men examined a pile of steel traps beside the door and a number of
pelts that were drying on frames in the open air.

"These aren't rangers.  They're just ordinary trappers," Mac whispered
to Horace.

"They've certainly been trapping.  But why do they want to run us out
of the country?"

In a few minutes both men went into the cabin, came out with rifles,
and started down the river-bank.

"They may be going down to our camp," Horace said, "and we must be
there to meet them.  We'd better hurry back."

The boys started at as fast a pace as the rough ground would allow.
Owing to dense thickets, swamps, and piled boulders, they could not
make much speed.  In about twenty minutes Fred heard a sound of falling
water in front, and supposed that they were approaching the river.  He
was mistaken.  Within a few yards they came upon a tiny lake fed by a
creek at one end and closed at the other by a pile of logs and brush.
Curious heaps of mud and sticks showed here and there above the water.
Horace uttered an exclamation.

"A beaver pond!" he cried.  "That explains it all."

In a moment the same thought flashed over Fred and Macgregor.  The
killing of beaver is entirely prohibited in Ontario; but in spite of
that, a good deal of illicit trapping goes on in the remote districts,
and the poachers usually carry their pelts across the line into the
Province of Quebec, where they can sell the fur.  Naturally, the
trappers had resented the appearance of the three boys in the vicinity
of the beaver pond; the men had no wish to have their illegal trapping
discovered.  It was the first beaver pond the boys had ever met with,
and in spite of their hurry they stopped to look at it.  They came upon
two or three traps skillfully set under water, and one of them
contained a beaver, sleek and drowned, held under the surface.
Apparently the men intended to clean out the pond, for the season was
already late for fur.

After a few minutes the boys hurried on.  They met no one on the way,
and they found everything undisturbed in camp; they kept a sharp
lookout all day, but no one came near them.

On the whole, they felt considerably relieved by the result of their
scouting.  The lawbreakers had no right to order them off the ground.
For their own part, the boys felt under no obligation to interfere with
the beaver trappers.

"If we meet any of them again, we'll let them know plainly that we know
how things stand," said Mac.  "We'll let them alone if they let us
alone, and I don't think there'll be any more trouble."

It rained hard that evening--a warm, steady downpour that lasted almost
until morning.  The tent leaked, and the boys passed a wretched night.
But day came pleasant and warm, with a moist, springlike air; the
leaves had unfolded in the night.  The warmth brought out the flies in
increased numbers.  They smeared their skins with a fresh application
of "fly dope," and with little thought for the fur poachers, started
out again to prospect.  All that day and the next they worked hard;
they saw nothing of the trappers, and found nothing even remotely
resembling blue clay.

The condition of their footwear had begun to worry them.  The rough
usage was beginning to tell heavily on their boots, which were already
ripping, and which had begun to wear through the soles; they would
hardly hold together for another fortnight.  But the boys bound them up
and patched them with strips of the deerskin, and kept hard at work.

In the course of the next two days they thoroughly examined all the
country within five miles of their present camp.  On the evening of the
second day they finished the last of the oatmeal, and Horace examined
the remaining supply of Graham flour with anxiety.

"Just about enough to get home on, boys," he said, looking dubiously at
his companions.

"But we're not going home!" cried Mac.

"The flour and beans'll be gone in another week, and we're a long way
from civilization.  Can we live on meat alone, Mac?"

"Pretty sure to come down with dysentery if we do--for any length of
time," admitted the medical student reluctantly.

There was silence round the fire.

"We didn't start this expedition right," said Horace, at last.  "I
should have planned it better.  We ought to have come with two or three
canoes and with twice as much grub, and we should have brought several
pairs of boots apiece."

He thrust out his foot; his bare skin showed through the ripped leather.

"Make moccasins," Mac suggested.

"They wouldn't stand the rough traveling for any time."

"What do you think we ought to do, Horace?" asked Fred.

"Well, I hate to retreat as much as any one," said Horace, after a
pause.  "But I know--better than either of you--the risk of losing our
lives if we try to run it too fine on provisions.  At the same time I
do think that we oughtn't to give up till we've reached the head of
this river.  It's probably not more than ten or fifteen miles up."

After some discussion they decided that Macgregor and Fred should make
the journey to the head of the river, carrying provisions for three
days; that would give them one day in which to prospect at the source.
Meanwhile, Horace was to strike across country to the northwest, to the
headwaters of the Whitefish River, about fifteen miles away.

The next morning, therefore, they carefully cached the canoe, the tent,
and the heavy part of the outfit, and started.  They were all to be
back on the third evening at the latest, whether they found anything or
not.

Fred and Mac made a wide detour to avoid the hut of the trappers.  They
had a hard day's tramp over the rough country, but reached their
destination rather sooner than they expected.  The river, shrunk to a
rapid creek, ended in a tiny lake between two hills.

The general surface of the country was the same as that which had
already grown so monotonously familiar, except that there was rather
more outcrop of bedrock.  Nowhere could they see anything that seemed
to suggest the presence of blue clay, and although they spent the whole
of the next twenty-four hours in making wide circles round the lake,
they found nothing.

The following morning they started back, depressed and miserable.  If
Horace's trip should also prove fruitless, the chances of their finding
the diamonds would be slim indeed.  The Smoke River made a wide turn to
the west and north, and they concluded that a straight line by compass
across the wilderness would save them several miles of travel, and
would also give them a chance to see some fresh ground.  They left the
river, therefore, and struck a bee-line to the southeast.  The new
ground proved as unprofitable as the old, and somewhat rougher.  The
journey had been hard on shoe leather; Fred was limping badly.

Late in the afternoon the boys stopped to rest on the top of a bare,
rocky ridge, where the black flies were not so bad as in the valleys.
They guessed that they were about four or five miles from camp.  The
sun shone level and warm from the west, and the boys sat in silence,
tired and discouraged.

"I'm afraid we're not going to make a million this trip, Mac," said
Fred, at last.

"No," Peter replied soberly.  "Unless Horace has struck something."

"It's too big a country to look over inch by inch.  If there really are
any diamond-beds--"

"Oh, there must be some.  Horace found scattered stones last summer,
you know.  But of course the beds may be far underground.  In South
Africa they often have to sink deep shafts to strike them."

Fred did not answer at once.  He had taken out the field-glass that he
carried, and was turning it aimlessly this way and that, when Mac spoke
suddenly:--

"What's that moving in the ravine--see!  About a hundred yards up,
below the big cedar on the rock."

"Ground hog, likely," said Fred, turning the glass toward the rocky
gorge, through which ran a little stream that lay at the base of the
ridge.  "I don't see anything.  Oh--yes, now I've got 'em.
One--two--three--four little animals.  Why, they're playing together
like kittens!  They look like young foxes, only they're far too
dark-colored."

Mac suddenly snatched the glass.  But Fred, now that he knew where to
look, could see the moving black specks with his unaided eye.  Just
behind them was a dark opening that might be the mouth of a den.

"They are foxes!" said Mac.  "It's a family of fox cubs.  You're right.
And--and--why, man, they're black--every one of them!"

He lowered the glass, almost dropping it in his excitement, and stared
at his companion.

"Fred, it's a den of black foxes!"




CHAPTER XII

"Black foxes!" cried Fred.  "Mac, give me the glass!"

"Black, all right," Macgregor said.  "Four of them, black as jet.  See
the fur shine!  I can't see the old ones.  There, I believe I saw
something move just inside the burrow!  Anyhow, all the cubs are going
in."

He handed the glass to Fred, who raised it to his eyes just in time to
see the black, bushy tail of the last cub disappear into the hole.

"Black foxes!" he said, in an awed whisper.  "Four of them!  Why, Mac,
they're worth a fortune, aren't they?"

"And probably two old ones," said the medical student.  "A fortune?
Rather!  Why, in London a good black fox pelt sometimes brings two or
three thousand dollars.  The traders here pay only a few hundreds, but
if I had a couple of good skins I'd take them over to London myself."

"But we haven't got them.  And we've no traps."

"One of us might watch here with the rifle for the old ones.  I could
hit a fox from here, but the bullet would tear the skin awfully."

"Yes, and it's too late in the spring now for the fur to be any good,
I'm afraid," said Fred.

"Not first-class, that's a fact," Mac admitted sadly.  "But what can we
do?  We can't wait here all summer for the cubs to grow up."

"Let's go down and take a look at the den," Fred proposed.

"Better not.  If the old foxes get suspicious they'll move the den and
we'll never find it again.  I think we'd best go quietly away.  This is
too big a thing for us to take chances on."

They took careful note of the spot before they left, and in order to
make assurance doubly sure, Mac blazed a tree every ten paces or so
until they struck the river again.

They had followed the river downward for about two miles when they saw
the smoke rising from their camping-ground.  Hurrying up, they found
that Horace had come in already.  He had brought out the supplies and
was frying bacon.

"What luck?" cried Fred, forgetting the foxes for a moment in his
anxiety to hear the result of Horace's trip.

"None," said Horace curtly.  He looked tired, dirty, and discouraged.
"I went clear to the Whitefish--nothing doing.  But what are you
fellows grinning about?  What did you find at the head of the river?
You haven't--it isn't possible that you've hit it!"

"No, not diamonds," said Mac.  "But we 've found something valuable."
And he told of their discovery of the black foxes.  "But the problem is
how to get them," he finished.  "The only way I can see is to shoot
them at long range."

"Shoot them!  Are you crazy?" exclaimed Horace, who was even more
stirred by the news than they had expected.  "Never!  Catch 'em alive!
They're worth their weight in gold."

"Alive!  I never thought of that!" exclaimed Fred.

"Why, their fur is no good now.  Besides, suppose you did get a
wretched thousand dollars or so for the pelts--what's that?  Why, down
in Prince Edward Island a pair of live black foxes for breeding was
sold for $45,000."

"Gracious!" gasped Fred.

"Down there every one is wild about breeding fur.  A big syndicate has
a ranch that's guarded with watchmen and burglar alarms like a bank.
Their great trouble is to get the breeding stock, and they'll pay
almost any price for live, uninjured black foxes.  If we could manage
to catch this pair of old ones and the four cubs without hurting them,
they ought to bring--I'd be afraid to guess how much!  Maybe a hundred
thousand dollars!  Kill them?  Why, you'd kill a goose that laid golden
eggs!"

"That's right!  I've heard of those fox ranches, of course," said Mac,
"but I didn't think of them at the moment.  A hundred thousand dollars!
But how on earth can we catch them?  We might dig the cubs out of their
den, but we couldn't get the old ones that way.  If we only had a few
traps!"

"Why, there's that trap I found in the woods!" exclaimed Fred suddenly.

They had all forgotten it; they had dropped the trap into the dunnage,
and had not seen or thought of it since.  Now, however, they eagerly
rummaged it out, and examined it critically.

It was badly rusted, but not broken.  Mac knocked off the dirt and rust
scales, rubbed it thoroughly with grease, and set it.  When he touched
the pan with a stick the jaws snapped.  The springs were a little
stiff, but after they had been worked several times and well greased,
the trap seemed to be almost as good as new.

"We should have three or four of them," said Peter.  "Having only one
trap gives us a slim chance.  But suppose we do get them, what then?"

"Why, we'll have to have some sort of cage ready in which to carry
them; then we'll make all the speed we can back to Toronto," replied
Horace.

"And give up the diamond hunt?" cried Mac, in disappointment.

"What else can we do, anyhow?" replied Horace.  "The flour is almost
gone and we're almost barefoot.  And see here, boys," he went on,
earnestly, "I hate to admit it, but I'm afraid my calculations were
wrong on these diamond-beds.  I thought it all out while I was coming
home from Whitefish River.  Somewhere up here in the North there must
be a place where those diamonds came from--but I'm beginning to believe
it isn't in this part of the country.  You see, the geological
formation is all different from the kind where diamond matrix is ever
found.  Those stones I picked up may have been traveling for a thousand
years down one creek and another.  They may have come down in the
glacial drift.  I was altogether too hasty, I see now, in assuming that
they originated in one of the rivers where I found them.

"They may have come from a river a hundred miles away.  Or perhaps from
deep underground.  We should have made a study of the geological
structure of this whole North Country, the direction of the glacial
drift, and everything.  Then we should have come in here prepared to
travel a thousand miles and stay all summer, or for two summers, if
necessary."

"Hanged if I'll give it up," said Mac stubbornly.  "However," he added,
"we must certainly try to catch these black diamonds, and we can keep
on prospecting at the same time."

They uncached their outfit, pitched the tent again, and prepared
supper; meanwhile they talked of the foxes until they reached a high
pitch of enthusiasm.  Even Mac admitted that the black foxes bade fair
to be as profitable as a small diamond-bed would be.  As for Fred, it
was almost with relief that he let the diamond hunt take second place
in his mind.  The continual strain of labor and failure had robbed the
search for the blue clay of much of its fascination.

Early the next morning they paddled up the river to the point where
Mac's blazed trail came down to the shore, and set out to reconnoiter
the den.  After half an hour's tramping across the woods they reached
the rocky ridge; through the field-glass they scrutinized the lair,
which was about two hundred yards away.

Not a hair of a fox was in sight, but the burrow looked as if it could
be opened with spade and pick.  Horace thought they ought to do that
first of all; in that way they could capture the cubs before there was
any possible danger of the old foxes' moving the den.

On their way back to camp, Mac stopped at a marshy pool and cut a great
armful of willow withes.

"It's lucky that I once used to watch an old willow worker making
baskets and chairs," he said.  "I'll see if I've forgotten the trick of
it.  We've got to make a cage, for we'll need one the instant we
capture one of those cubs."

He made a strong framework of birch, with bars as thick as his wrist,
which he notched together, and lashed with deer-hide.  Then he had the
framework of a box about three feet long, two feet wide, and two feet
deep, through which he now began to weave the tough, pliable withes.

He did not altogether remember the trick of it, and he had to stop
frequently to plan it out.  He worked all that afternoon, and continued
his labor by firelight.  He did not finish the cage until the middle of
the next forenoon.  It was rough-looking, but light, and nearly as
strong as an iron trunk, and had a door in the top.

All that remained for them to do now was to catch the game.  They ate a
hasty luncheon, and carrying the cage, the trap, the axe, the spade and
pick, two blankets, and the guns, started back along Mac's blazed
trail.  So great was their eager hurry that they stumbled over roots
and stones.

Clambering down the ravine, they cautiously approached the foxes' den.
The opening to the burrow was a triangular hole between two flat rocks.
From it came a faint odor of putrid flesh.  The ground in front was
strewn with muskrat tails, small bones, and the beaks and feet of
partridges and ducks.  From the rocks Fred picked off two or three
black hairs.

The boys looked into the dark hole and listened intently.  They could
not hear a sound, but they knew that the cubs, at any rate, must be
within.  Mac cut a sapling, trimmed it down and sharpened one end of
it; with that as a lever the boys loosened the rocks at the entrance of
the burrow, and rolled them aside.  The burrow ran backward and
downward into the ground, but there seemed to be nothing in their way
now except earth, gravel, and roots.  Horace picked up the spade and
began to dig; occasionally he had to stop to cut a tree root or pick
out a rock.  Meanwhile, Peter and Fred stood close behind him, ready to
stuff the blankets into the hole in case the occupants should try to
bolt.

They uncovered the burrow for about four feet; then they had to
dislodge another rather large stone.  There seemed to be a large, dark
cavity down behind it.  When they stopped to listen, they could hear a
slight sound of movement in the darkness, and a faint squeaking.

"They're there," said Horace; "not a yard away.  Now who's going to
reach in and pull 'em out?"

Macgregor volunteered at once; he crept up to the hole and cautiously
thrust in his arm.  There was a sound of scrambling inside and a sharp
squeal.  Mac, with a strained expression on his face, groped about with
his hand inside the hole.

When he withdrew his arm, there was blood on his hand, but he held by
the neck a little jet-black animal with a bushy tail, as large as a
kitten.

"Open the cage--quick!" he cried.

Fred held the door up, and Mac dropped the cub in.  For a moment the
animal rushed from side to side, and then crouched trembling in a
corner.

"Nipped me on the thumb," said Mac, examining his hand.  "They've got
teeth like needles.  But the old one doesn't seem to be there now, and
I can easily get the rest."

He fished the second out without being bitten, and caged it safely.
But his hold on the third cub could not have been very secure, for the
little creature managed by struggling frantically to squirm out of his
hand.  It turned over in the air, landed on its four feet, and darted
swiftly away.

The boys shouted in dismay.  Fred flung himself sprawling upon the cub;
but it evaded him like lightning, and bolted into the undergrowth.  It
would have been useless to pursue it.

The boys were greatly chagrined.

"It was my fault," said Peter, in disgust.  "But it can't be helped
now, and there's another to come out."

He had trouble in getting hold of the last of the cubs.  Twice he
winced with pain as the animal bit him, but at last he hauled it into
view.  It was a little larger than the others; it scratched and bit
like a fury, and nearly broke away before they got it into the cage.

The boys gathered round and gloated over their prizes.  With their
glossy jet coats, bushy tails, prick-eared faces, and comical air of
intense intelligence, the cubs were beautiful little creatures; but
they were all in a desperate panic, and huddled together in the
farthest corner of the cage.

"If we can only get them home in good condition they should be worth
fifteen thousand," said Horace.  "But I'm much afraid they won't live
unless we can get the mother to travel with them.  But now that we have
the cubs it should be rather easy to catch her, and maybe the father,
too."

They set the cage back into the hollow made by the ruined burrow, and
laid spruce branches over it so that it was well hidden.  Then they
wrapped the jaws of the trap with strips of cloth so that they would
not cut the fox's skin, and set it directly in front of the cage.
Finally they scattered dead leaves over the trap.  The cubs themselves
would act as bait.

"A fox never deserts her young," Horace said.  "She's sure to come back
to-night, probably along with her mate, to carry off the cubs, and
we've a good chance to catch one or both of them."

It seemed dangerous to go away and leave that precious cageful of
little foxes at the mercy, perhaps, of the beaver trappers; perhaps
prowling lynxes or wolves.  However, the boys had to take the risk.  As
to the trappers, they had seen nothing of them for so long that they
had little fear of them.

They went back to camp and tried to pass the time; but they could talk
of nothing except black foxes.  Fred conceived the idea of using their
stock to start a breeding establishment of their own, and Macgregor was
elaborating the plan, when suddenly he stopped with a frown.

"Is it so certain that the parents of those cubs are black?" he asked.
"I've heard that black foxes are an accident, a sport, and that the
mother or father is very often red."

"That's something that naturalists have never settled," replied Horace.
"Some think that the black fox is a distinct strain, others that it's
merely a 'sport,' as you say.  However, when all the cubs in the litter
are pure black, I think it's safe to assume that the parents are black
also."

It was scarcely daylight the next morning before the boys were hurrying
along the blazed trail again.  Shaking with suppressed excitement, they
approached the ravine of the foxes.  When they came in sight of the den
and the cage their anticipation was succeeded by bitter disappointment.
The trap was undisturbed.  Nothing had been caught.  The cubs were
still in the cage, as frightened as ever.

But they found that one at least of the old foxes had visited the
place, for the dry leaves were disturbed; there were marks of sharp
teeth on the willows of the cage, and inside the cage were the tails of
a couple of wood mice.  Unable to get her cubs out of the cage, the
mother had brought them food.

It seemed too bad to take advantage of her mother love, but as Horace
remarked, all they desired was to restore her to her family; once on
the fox ranch, she would be treated like a queen.

They put the cage farther back and piled rocks round it, so that it
could be approached only by one narrow path.  In the path they placed
the trap, and again covered it carefully with leaves.

The cubs had to be left for another night, and the boys had another
hard day of waiting.  None of them had the heart to try to prospect.
Macgregor went after ducks with the shotgun; the others lounged about,
and killed time as best they could.  They all went to bed early, and
before sunrise again started for the den.

It was fully light when they came to the hill over the ravine, and as
they sighted the den, a cry of excitement broke from all three of them
at once.

From where they stood they could see the cage, and the crouching form
of a black animal beside it, evidently in the trap.  And over the beast
with the dark fur stood a man in a buckskin jacket, with a club raised
to strike.




CHAPTER XIII

Fred and Mac, who were carrying the guns, fired wildly at the man at
the trap; they took no aim, for their only purpose was to startle him
and to keep him from killing the fox.  When the shots rang out, the man
straightened up, saw the boys rushing down the hill toward him, and
dropped his club.  Stepping back, he picked up his rifle, and as they
dashed up, held it ready to shoot.

Fred gave a whoop when he saw that the animal in the trap was really a
black fox; moreover, it was the mother fox.  Her black coat was glossy
and spotless.

Horace turned to the man.  "Let that fox alone!" he cried.  "That's our
fox!"

"Yours?  It's my fox!" retorted the man angrily.  "Why, that's my trap!"

"I don't believe it; we found it in the woods.  Anyway, you can have
the trap if you like, but the fox is certainly ours.  We've been after
her for some time."

"Me and my pardners have been after this fox all winter," declared the
trapper.  "Now that we've got her we 're going to keep her--you can bet
on that."

He made a movement toward the fox.

"None of that!" cried Mac, sharply, and snapped a fresh cartridge into
the rifle chamber.

"You would, would you?" cried the trapper, and instantly covered Peter
with his gun.  Fred had reloaded the shotgun, and he covered the man in
his turn.

So for a moment they all stood at a deadlock.

"Put down your guns!" said Horace.  "A fox pelt isn't worth killing a
man for, and this pelt's no good, anyway.  It's too late in the season.
We're going to take this fox away with us alive.  Stick to your
beavers, for you can't steal this animal from us--and you can bet on
that!" he added, with great emphasis.

"You might shoot one of us, but you'd have a hole in you the next
minute," said Mac.  "You'd better drop it, now, and get out!"

The trapper glared at them with a face as savage as a wildcat's.  For a
second Fred really expected him to shoot.  Then, with a muttered curse,
the man lowered his gun.

"You pups won't bark so loud when I come back!" he snarled.  Then he
turned, and started away at a rapid pace.

"Bluffed!" Fred exclaimed, trembling now that the strain was over.

"He's gone for the rest of his gang!" Mac cried.  "Quick, we've got to
get out of here!"

"Yes, and far away, too," said Horace, "now that we've caught the
mother fox.  We should never have got the male, anyway.  Let's get this
beauty into her box."

The black fox was indeed a beauty, but there was no time to admire her.
Snarling viciously, she laid back her ears and showed her white teeth.
Her hind leg was in the trap, but did not appear to have been injured
by the padded jaws.

Horace cut two strong forked sticks, with which the boys pinned her
down by the neck and hips.  Fred opened the jaws of the trap; Mac
picked the fox up firmly by the back of her neck, and in spite of her
frantic struggles, thrust her into the cage.

Horace and Mac then seized the box, one at either end, and started
toward the river; Fred carried the guns and kept a sharp lookout in
front.  The cage of foxes was not heavy, but it was so clumsy that the
boys had hard work carrying it over the rough ground.  After stumbling
for a few rods, they cut a long pole and slipped it through the handles
in the ends of the cage.  After that they made somewhat better
progress, although even then they could not travel at a very rapid pace.

"If those fellows have a canoe," panted Mac, "they'll be down the river
before we can get to camp!"

"You may be sure they'll do their best," said Horace.  "These foxes are
probably worth ten times their winter catch.  We'll have to break camp
instantly and make for home as fast as we can."

They went plunging along through the thickets, and up and down the
rocky hills; it was well that the cage was strong.

After more than an hour of this arduous tramping they heard the rush of
the river.  "We'd best scout a little way ahead before we go any
farther," Horace declared.

They set down the cage, crept forward to the river and reconnoitered
the bank.  Their canoe was where they had left it, concealed behind a
cedar thicket, and no other canoe was in sight up or down the river.
Horace swept the shore with the field-glass.

"Nothing in sight," he reported.  "We may have time to pack our outfit
and get off, after all.  Possibly those fellows haven't a canoe."

They quickly launched the canoe, and put the cage of black foxes
amidships; Fred sat behind it in order to hold it steady.  Horace took
the stern paddle, and Peter the bow.

The river ran swift and rather shallow, but there were no dangerous
rapids between them and camp.  They swept down the current, and in a
few minutes the tent came in sight.  Horace took up the glass again,
but he could see no sign of the trappers.  They paddled on, intending
to land at their usual place, but when they were scarcely twenty yards
from the tent, Fred uttered a suppressed cry.

"Look!  A canoe--lower down!"  He spoke barely loud enough for his
brother to hear him.  He had caught a glimpse of the bow of a birch
canoe, which was thrust back almost out of sight behind a willow clump
below the campground.

"Run straight past!" Horace commanded, instantly.  "Dig in your paddle,
Mac!"

The canoe shot forward, and at doubled speed swept by the tent.  As
they passed it a man rose from behind a thicket and yelled hoarsely:--

"Stop, there!  Halt!"

_Bang!_ went a rifle somewhere behind them, and then the rapid _crack!
crack! crack!_ of more than one repeater.  A bullet clipped through the
sides of the canoe, fortunately well above the water-line.  Another
glanced from a rock, and hummed past them.

As the boys whirled by the ambushed birch canoe, Fred snatched up the
shotgun, and sent two loads of buckshot tearing through its sides.

"That'll cripple them for a while!" he cried.

_Bang!_  A better-aimed bullet dashed the steering paddle from Horace's
hands.  The canoe swerved, and heeled in the current.  Horace snatched
the extra paddle that lay in the stern, and brought the craft round
just in time to prevent it from upsetting.  As the paddle that had been
hit floated past, Fred picked it up; it had a round hole through the
handle.

The canoe was a hundred yards from the tent now, and was going so fast
that it offered no easy target to the men behind, who, however, still
continued to shoot.  Another bullet nicked the stern.  Glancing over
his shoulder, Fred saw the three trappers running down the shore, and
firing as they ran.  But in another moment the canoe swept round a bend
in the river, and was screened from the trappers by the wooded shore.

"Keep it up!  Make all the speed you can!" cried Horace.

Down the fast current they shot like an arrow.  As they went round
another curve, they heard the roar of rushing water ahead; a short but
turbulent rapid confronted them.  There the river, foaming and surging,
dashed down over the black rocks; the shore was rough and covered with
dense thickets.  The boys remembered the hard work they had had making
a portage here on the way up; but there was no time to make a portage
now.

"Down we go!  Look sharp for her bow, Mac!" Horace sang out.

The rush of the rapid seemed to snatch up the canoe like a leaf.  Fred
caught his breath; the pit of his stomach seemed to sink.  There was a
deafening roar all around him, a chaos of white water, flying spray,
and sharp rocks that sprang up and flashed behind.  Then, before he had
recovered his breath, they shot out into the smooth river below.

Six inches of water was slopping in the bottom of the canoe, but they
ran on without stopping to bale it out.  For over half a mile the
smooth, swift current lasted; then came another rapid.  It was longer
and more dangerous than the other, and the boys carried the canoe and
the foxes round it.  They would not risk spilling the precious cage,
and for the present they thought that they had outrun their pursuers.

For another mile or two they descended the river, until they came to
another carry.  They made the portage, and stopped at the bottom to
discuss their situation and make their plans.  They had escaped the
trappers, indeed, and they had the foxes; but except the canoe, a
blanket, the guns, and the light axe that Mac had at his belt, they had
nothing else.  "I guess this settles our prospecting, boys," said
Horace.  "What are we to do now?  Shall we go on, or--"

"Or what?" Fred asked, as his brother stopped.

"I hardly know.  But here we are, without supplies, and at least a
hundred and fifty miles from any place where we can get them.  We all
know what a hard road it is, and going back it'll be up-stream all the
way, after we leave this river."

"Do we have to go back the way we came?"

"Well, instead of turning up the Missanabie River when we come to it,
we might go straight down it to Moose Factory, the Hudson Bay Company's
post at the mouth; but if we did that, these foxes would never live
till we got back to Toronto.  It would be too long and hard a trip for
them."

"That settles it.  We don't go that way," said Mac.  "Surely we can get
home in ten or twelve days the way we came, and we ought to be able to
kill enough to live on during that time."

"How many cartridges have we?" asked Horace dubiously.

Macgregor had nineteen cartridges in his belt, and there were six more
in the magazine of the rifle.  Fred had only ten shells in his pockets,
and the shotgun was empty.  They had left the fishing tackle at camp,
but luckily they had plenty of matches.

"If we can get a deer within the next day or so, or even a few ducks or
partridges, we may make it," said Horace.  "But I've noticed that game
is always scarce when you need it most.  Now if we turned back and
tried to recover our outfit, we should certainly have to fight the
trappers, and probably we'd be worsted, for they outmatch us in
weapons.  One of us might be killed, and we'd be almost certain to lose
the foxes."

"Trade these foxes for some flour and bacon?  I'd starve first!" said
Fred.

"So would I!" cried Macgregor.  "But we won't starve.  We didn't starve
last winter, when we hadn't a match or a grain of powder, and when the
mercury was below zero most of the time, too."

"Well, we'll go on, if you say so," said Horace.  "It's a mighty
dangerous trip, but I don't see what else we can do."

"Forward it is, then!" cried Fred.

"And hang the risk!" exclaimed Mac, springing up to push the canoe into
the water.

"Do you think those men will really follow us, Horace?" asked Fred.

"Sure to," replied his brother.  "It'll take them a few hours to patch
up their canoe, but they 're probably better canoemen than we are, and
we'll have to work mighty hard to keep ahead of them."

Fred was more optimistic.  "They'll have to work mighty hard to keep up
with us," he said, as they launched the canoe.

Going down the river was very different from coming up it.  The current
ran so swiftly that the boys could not add much to their speed by
paddling; all they had to do was to steer the craft.  The water was so
high that they could run most of the rapids, and stretches that they
had formerly toiled up with tumpline or tracking-line they now covered
with the speed of a bullet.

Toward noon Fred became intolerably hungry; but neither of the others
spoke of eating, and he did not mention his hunger.  Mac, in the bow,
put the shotgun where he could easily reach it, and scanned the shores
for game as closely as he could; but no game showed itself.  They
traveled all day without seeing anything except now and then a few
ducks, which always took wing while still far out of range.

At last they came to "Buck Rapids," where they had shot the deer.  The
river there was one succession of rapids, most of which were too
dangerous to run through.  It was the place where, on the way up, they
had made only four miles in a whole day; and they did not cover more
than ten miles this afternoon.

When they came to the long, narrow lake on the lower reaches of the
river, the sun was setting.  They were all pretty much exhausted with
the toil and excitement of the day.

"I vote we stop here," said Mac.  "There'll be a moon toward midnight,
and we can go on then.  We ought to get some sleep."

"I'm too hungry to sleep," said Fred.

"Well, so am I," Mac admitted.  "But we can rest, anyway."

So they drew up the canoe and lighted a fire, partly from force of
habit and partly to drive away the mosquitoes.  They carefully lifted
the fox cage ashore.

"We've nothing for them to eat," Horace said anxiously, "but they ought
to have water, at any rate."

The difficulty was that they had nothing to put water into.  Mac made a
sort of cup from an old envelope, and filled it with water, but the
animals shrank away and would not touch it.  Feeling sure, however,
that they must be thirsty, the boys carried the cage to the river, and
set one end of it into the shallow water.  For a few minutes the mother
fox was shy, but presently she drank eagerly; then the cubs dipped
their sharp noses into the water.

The boys spread their only blanket on a few hemlock boughs and lay
down.  Although they were so thoroughly tired, none of them could
sleep.  Fred's stomach was gnawed by hunger; he was still much excited,
and in the rush of the river he fancied every minute or two that he
heard the trappers approaching.

They lay there for some time, talking at intervals, and at last Mac got
up restlessly.  He threw fresh wood on the fire, in order to make a
bright blaze; then from an old pine log close by he began to cut a
number of resinous splinters.  When he had collected a large handful of
them, he went down to the canoe, and tried to fix them in the ring in
the bow of the craft.

"What in the world are you doing?" asked Fred, who had got up to see
what Peter was about.

Peter hammered the bundle of splinters home.  "If we don't get meat in
twelve hours we won't be able to travel fast--can't keep up steam," he
said.  "There's only one way to shoot game at night, and that's--"

"Jack light," said Horace, who recognized the device.  "It's a regular
pot-hunter's trick, but pot-hunters we are, and no mistake about that.
I only hope it works."




CHAPTER XIV

Here where deer were plentiful and hunters scarce, Mac's jack light
should prove effective.  Sportsmen and the law have quite properly
united in condemning killing deer by jack light; but the boys felt that
their need of food justified their course.

After adjusting the torch, Mac cut a birch sapling about eight feet
long, and trimmed off the twigs.  Bending it into a semicircle, he
fitted the curve into the bottom of the canoe, close to the bow; then
he hung the blanket by its corners upon the projecting tips of the
sapling, and thus screened the bow from the rest of the canoe.

As it had already become dark, and the shores were now black with the
indistinct shadows of the spruces, Fred and Horace set the canoe gently
into the water.  When it was afloat, Mac lighted the pine splinters,
which crackled and flared up like a torch.

"You'd make a better game poacher than I, Horace," he said.  "You take
the rifle, and I'll paddle."

Horace accordingly placed himself just behind the blanket screen, with
the weapon on his knees.  Mac sat in the stern, and Fred, who did not
want to be left behind, seated himself amidships.

"Keep a sharp lookout, both of you," Mac said.  "Watch for the light on
their eyes, like two balls of fire."

The canoe, keeping about thirty yards from shore, glided silently down
the long lake.  The "fat" pine flamed smoky and red, and it cast long,
wavering reflections on the water.  Once an animal, probably a muskrat,
startled them by diving noisily.  A duck, sleeping on the water, rose
with a frantic splutter and flurry of wings.  Then, fifty yards
farther, there was a sudden splash near the shore, then a crashing in
the bushes, and a dying thump-thump in the distance.

Horace swung his rifle round, but he was too late.  The deer had not
stopped to stare at the light for an instant.  A jack light ought to
have a reflector, but the boys had no means of contriving one.

Unspeakably disappointed, they moved slowly on again.  They started no
more game, and at last reached the lower end of the lake.  Here Mac
stopped to renew the torch, which had almost burned out.

Then they turned up the other side of the lake, on the home stretch.
No living thing except themselves seemed to be on the water that night.
The shore shoaled far out.  Once the keel scraped over a bottom of soft
mud.  Lilies grew along the shore, and sometimes extended out so far
that the canoe brushed the half-grown pads.

Suddenly Fred felt the canoe swerve slightly, and head toward the land.
Horace raised the rifle.  Fred had seen nothing, but after straining
his eyes ahead, he made out two faint spots of light in the darkness,
at about the height of a man's head.  Could it be a deer?  The balls of
light remained perfectly motionless.

Without a splash the canoe glided closer.  Fred thought that he could
make out the outline of the animal's head, and clenched his hands in
anxiety.  Why did not Horace shoot?

Suddenly a blinding flash blazed out from the rifle, and the report
crashed across the water.  There was a splash, followed immediately by
a noise of violent thrashing in the water near the land.

Fred and Mac shouted together.  With great paddle strokes, Mac drove
the canoe forward, and at last Horace leaped out.  The others followed
him.  The deer was down, struggling in the water.  It was dead before
they reached it.  Horace's bullet had broken its neck.

"Hurrah!" Fred cried.  "This makes us safe.  This'll last us all the
way home."

It was a fine young buck--so heavy that they had hard work to lift it
into the canoe.  Far up the lake they could see their camp-fire, and
they paddled toward it with the haste of half-starved men.

Without stopping to cut up the animal, they skinned one haunch and cut
off slices, which they set to broil over the coals.  A delicious odor
rose; the boys did not even wait until the meat had cooked thoroughly.
They had no salt, but the venison, unseasoned as it was, seemed
delicious.

The food gave them all more cheerfulness and energy.  The prospect of a
hard ten days' journey did not look so bad now.  At any rate, they
would not starve.

"I wonder if the foxes would eat it.  They ought to have something,"
said Fred, and he dropped some scraps of the raw venison into the cage.

As he stooped to peer more closely at the animals, he made a startling
discovery.  During their absence on the hunt, the mother fox had been
gnawing vigorously at the willow cage, particularly at the rawhide
lashings that bound the framework together.  She had loosened one
corner, and if she had been left alone for another hour, she might have
escaped with her cubs.  It gave the boys a bad fright.  Mac refastened
the lashings with strips of deer-hide, and strengthened the cage with
more willow withes.  But the boys realized that in the future one of
them would have to stand guard over the cage at night.

The foxes refused to touch the raw meat.

"I didn't expect them to eat for the first day or two," said Horace.
"Don't worry.  They'll eat in time, when they get really hungry."

"Let's get this buck cut up," said Mac.  "It'll soon be moonrise, and
we must be moving."

In order to get more light for their work, they piled pitch pine on the
fire; then they hung the deer on a tree, and began the disagreeable
task of skinning and dressing the animal.  When they had finished, they
had a good deerskin and nearly two hundred pounds of fresh meat.

They would gladly have slept now, but the sky was brightening in the
east with the rising moon, and there was no time for rest.  No doubt
the trappers were on their trail, somewhere behind them.  Hastily the
boys loaded the foxes and the venison into the canoe, and as soon as
the moon showed above the trees paddled down the lake.  They soon found
that the moonlight was not bright enough to enable them to run rapids
safely, and they consequently had to make frequent carries.  Between
the rapids they shot swiftly down the current, but the river was so
broken that they made no great progress that night.

Northern summer nights are short, and soon after two o'clock the sky
began to lighten.  By three o'clock the boys could see well, and they
went on faster, shooting all except the worst stretches of rough water.
Shortly after six o'clock they came out from the Smoke River into the
Missanabie.

"Stop for breakfast?" asked Mac.

"Not here," said Horace.  "We must be careful not to mark our trail,
especially at this point.  They won't know for sure whether we turned
up the Missanabie or down, and they may make a mistake and lose a lot
of time.  A canoe doesn't leave any track, and we mustn't land until we
have to."

Now the hard work of "bucking the river" began again.  The Missanabie
had lowered somewhat since the boys had come down it, but it still ran
so strong that they could not make much progress by paddling.  Their
canoe poles were far back on the Smoke River, and they did not dare to
land in order to cut others, for in doing so they would mark their
trail.

Straining hard at every stroke, they dug their paddles into the water;
but they made slow work of it.  The least carelessness on their part
would cause them to lose in one minute as much as they had gained in
ten.

A stretch of slacker water gave them some respite; but then came a
long, tumbling, rock-strewn rapid.

"We'll have to portage here," said Mac.

"It'll be a long carry," Horace said.  "We'd lose a good deal of time
over it.  I think we can track her up."

Mac and Horace carried the cage of foxes along the shore to the head of
the broken water, and Fred carried up the guns.  Returning to the foot
of the rapid, they prepared to haul the canoe against the stream.
Luckily the tracking-line had always been kept in the canoe.  Horace
tied it to the ring in the bow, took the end of the rope and, bracing
himself firmly, waded into the water; Macgregor and Fred, on either
side, held the craft steady.

The bed of the river was very irregular.  Sometimes the water was no
more than knee-deep; sometimes it reached their hips.  The water was
icy cold, and the rush and roar of the current were bewildering.  Once
Mac lost his footing, but he clung to the canoe and recovered himself.
Then, when halfway up the rapid, Horace stepped on an unsteady stone
and plunged down, face forward, into the roaring water.

As the towline slackened, the canoe swung round with a jerk against
Macgregor, and upset him.  Fred tried to hold it upright, but the
unstable craft went over like a shot.

Out went the venison and everything else that was in her.  Fred made a
desperate clutch at the stern of the canoe, caught it and held on.  As
the canoe shot down the rapid, he trailed out like a streamer behind
it.  He heard a faint, smothered yell:--

"The venison!  Save the meat!"

Almost before he knew it, Fred, half choked, still clinging to the
canoe, drifted into the tail of the rapid.  He found bottom there, for
the water was not deep, and managed to right the canoe.  By that time
Macgregor had got to his feet, and was coming down the shore to help
Fred.  They were both dripping and chilled; but they got into the
canoe, and poling with two sticks, set out to rescue what they could.

They must, above everything else, recover the venison, but they could
see no sign of it.  Some distance down the stream they found both
paddles afloat, and they worked the canoe up and down below the rapid.
On a jutting rock they found the deerskin.  Finally they came upon one
of the hindquarters floating sluggishly almost under water.  They
rescued it joyfully; but although they searched for a long time, they
found no more of the meat.

They had left the axe in the canoe, and it was now somewhere at the
bottom of the river.  They could better have spared one of the guns,
but they were thankful that their loss had been no greater.

"If we had left the foxes in the canoe," said Fred, "they'd have been
drowned, sure!"

Horace had waded ashore, and now had a brisk fire going.  Fred and
Macgregor joined him, and the three boys stood shivering by the blaze,
with their wet clothes steaming.

"We're well out of it," said Horace, with chattering teeth.  "The worst
is the loss of the axe.  It won't be easy to make fires from now on."

Once more the problem of supplies loomed dark before the boys.  They
had nothing now except the haunch of venison, which weighed perhaps
twenty-five pounds; unless they could pick up more game, that would
have to last them until they reached civilization.  However, they were
fairly confident that they could find game soon, and meanwhile they
could put themselves on rations.

"We've marked our trail all right now," said Mac.  "These tracks and
this fire will give it away.  We may as well portage, after all."

Their clothing was far from dry, but they were afraid to delay longer.
None of them felt like trying to wade up the rapid again, and so they
carried the canoe round it.  At the head of the portage they cut
several strong poles to use in places where they could not paddle.

They soon found that without the poles they could hardly have made any
progress at all; and even with them they moved very slowly.  About noon
they landed, broiled and ate a small piece of venison, and after a
brief rest set out on their journey again.

By five o'clock they were all dead tired, wet, and chilled, and Mac and
Fred were ready to stop.  Horace, however, urged them to push on.  He
felt that perhaps the beaver trappers were not many miles behind.
After another day or two, he said, they could take things more easily,
but now they ought to hurry on at top speed.

Just before they were ready to land in order to make camp, three ducks
splashed from the water just in front of the canoe.  Fred managed to
drop one of them with each barrel of the shot gun.  Thus the boys got
their supper without having to draw on their supply of venison; but the
roasted ducks proved almost as tough as rawhide and, without salt,
extremely unpalatable.  But they were all so hungry that they devoured
the birds almost completely; they put the heads into the willow cage,
but the foxes would not touch them.

For three hours more they pushed on up the river, tired, silent, but
determined.  At last it began to grow dark.  The boys had reached the
limit of their endurance, for they had had no sleep the night before.
They landed and built a fire.  It was hard work to get enough wood
without the axe, but fortunately the night was not cold.

Exhausted as the boys were, they knew that one of them would have to
stand watch to see that the foxes did not gnaw their way out of the
cage, and that the trappers did not attack the camp.  They drew lots
for it; Macgregor selected the short straw and Fred the long one, and
they arranged that Mac should take the watch for two hours, then
Horace, and lastly Fred.

The mosquitoes were bad, and there were no blankets, but Fred seemed to
go to sleep the moment he lay down on the earth.  He did not hear
Horace and Mac change guard at midnight, and it seemed to him that he
had scarcely done more than close his eyes when some one shook him by
the arm.

"Wake up!  It's your turn to watch!" Horace was saying.

Half dead with sleep, Fred staggered to his feet.  Moonlight lay on the
forest and river.

"Take the rifle," said Horace.  "There's not been a sign of anything
stirring, but keep a sharp eye on the foxes."

Horace lay down beside Mac and seemed to fall asleep at once.  Fred
would have given black foxes and diamonds together to do likewise, but
he walked up and down until he felt less drowsy.  The foxes were not
trying to get out, and he saw that they had gnawed the duck heads down
to the bills.

He sat down against a tree, close to the cage, with the loaded repeater
across his knees.  For some time the mosquitoes, as well as the
responsibility of his position, kept him awake.

Every sound in the forest startled him; through the dash of the river
he imagined that he heard the sound of paddles.  But by degrees he grew
indifferent to the mosquitoes, and his strained attention flagged.
Drowsiness crept upon him again; he was very tired.  He found himself
nodding, and roused himself with a shock of horror.  He thought that he
would go down to the river and dip his head into the water.  He dozed
while he was thinking of it--dozed and awoke, and dozed again.

Then after what seemed a moment's interval he was awakened by a harsh
voice shouting:--

"Hands up!  Wake up, and surrender!"




CHAPTER XV

Half awake, Fred made a blind snatch at the rifle that had been across
his lap.  It was gone.

The sky was bright with dawn.  Ten feet away stood three men with
leveled rifles.  Horace and Mac were sitting up, holding their hands
above their heads and looking dazed.

"I said you pups wouldn't bark so loud next time," remarked one of the
newcomers.  It was the man that had pretended to be a ranger.  With him
was the slim, dark fellow whom they had seen outside the trappers'
shack, and the third was a tall, elderly, bearded man, who looked more
intelligent and more vicious than the others.

None of the boys said anything, but Horace gave Fred a reproachful
glance that almost broke his heart.  It was his fault that this had
happened, and he knew it.  Tears of rage and shame started to his eyes.
He looked about desperately for a weapon.  He would gladly risk his
life to get his companions out of the awkward scrape into which his
negligence had plunged them.  But the ranger had taken the boys' rifle,
and the half-breed had picked up the shotgun.

With a grin of triumph the trappers went to the fox cage, peered at the
animals, and talked eagerly in low voices.  The boys watched them in
suspense.  Were they going to kill the foxes?

Presently two of the men picked up the cage and carried it down to the
river.  The light was strong enough now so that Fred could see the bow
of a bark canoe drawn up on the shore.  They put the cage into the
canoe.  Then the half-breed laid his rifle and the stolen shotgun
beside it, and paddled down the river.  The other two men lifted the
boys' Peterboro into the water.

"You aren't going to rob us of our firearms and our canoe, too, are
you?" cried Horace desperately.  "You might as well murder us!"

"Guess you won't need the guns," said the third trapper.  "You've got
grub, I see, and we durstn't leave you any canoe to foller us up in."

The two men pushed off the Peterboro and followed the birch canoe down
the river at a rapid pace.  In two minutes they were out of sight round
a bend.

There was a dead silence.  Fred could not meet the eyes of his
companions.  He turned away, pretended to look for something, and
fairly broke down.

"Brace up, Fred!" said his brother.  "It can't be helped, and we're not
blaming you.  It might have happened to any of us."

"If you'd been awake you might have got shot," said Mac, "and that
would have been a good deal worse for every one concerned."

But Fred was inconsolable.  Through his tears, he stammered that he
wished he had been shot.  They had lost the foxes, they were stranded
and destitute, and they stood a good chance of never getting out alive.

"Nonsense!" said Mac, with forced cheerfulness.  "We were in a far
worse fix last winter, and we came out on top."

"The first thing to do is to have some grub," added Horace.  "Then
we'll talk about it."

Looking with calculating eyes at the lump of meat, he cut the slices of
venison very thin.  There was about twenty pounds left.  They roasted
the meat he had cut off, and ate it; then Horace unfolded his pocket
map and spread it on the ground.

They were probably forty miles from the Height of Land.  It was twelve
miles across the long carry, and at least forty more to the nearest
inhabited point--almost a hundred miles in all.  There was a chance,
however, that they might meet some party of prospectors or Indians.

"It's terribly rough traveling afoot," said Horace.  "We could hardly
make it in less than two weeks.  Besides, our shoes are nearly gone
now."

"And that piece of venison will never last us for two weeks!" cried
Macgregor.

"Oh, you can often knock down a partridge with a stick," said Horace.

"If we only had a canoe!" Mac exclaimed, with a burst of rage.  "I'd
run those thieves down if I had to follow them to Hudson Bay!"

They all agreed on that point, but it was useless to think of following
them without a canoe.  The boys would have all they could do to save
their own lives; a hundred-mile journey on foot across that wilderness,
without arms and with almost no provisions, was a desperate undertaking.

"Well, we've got no choice," said Horace, after a dismal silence.  "We
must put ourselves on rations of about half a pound of meat a day, and
we'll lay a bee-line course by the compass for the trail over the
Height of Land."

He marked the course on the map, and the boys studied it in silence.
The sun had risen by this time, but the boys were not anxious to break
camp and start on that journey which would perhaps prove fatal to all
of them.  They lingered, talking, discussing, hesitating, reluctant to
make the start.

Fred had not contributed a single word to the discussion.  He had
barely managed to swallow a little breakfast, and was too miserable to
join in the talk.  He knew how slim their chances were; he imagined how
the party would struggle on, growing weaker daily, until--

If only they had a canoe!  If only they could run the robbers down and
ambush them in their turn!  And as he puzzled on the problem, an
idea--an inspiration--flashed into his mind.

He bent over, and studied the map intently for a second.

"Look!  Look here!" he cried, wildly.  "What fools we are!  We can
overtake those fellows--catch 'em--cut 'em off before they get
anywhere--and get back our grub, and the foxes, and the
canoe--everything--why--"

"What's that?  What do you mean?" cried Horace and Mac together.

Fred placed a trembling finger on the map.

"See, this is where we are, isn't it?  Those thieves will go down here
to the mouth of the Smoke River, and turn up it to their camp.  They
didn't have much outfit with them; so they'll go back to their shanty.
It's about fifty miles round by the way they'll go, but if we cut
straight across country--this way--we'd strike the Smoke in twenty-five
miles, and be there before them."

"I do believe you've hit something, Fred!" Mac exclaimed.

In fact, the Smoke and the Missanabie Rivers made the arms of an acute
angle.  Between twenty and thirty miles straight to the northwest would
bring them out on the former stream somewhere in the neighborhood of
"Buck Rapids."

"Let's see!" calculated Horace hurriedly.  "They can run down to the
mouth of the Smoke in a few hours from here.  After that it'll be
slower work, but they'll have the portage trails that we cut, and they
ought to get up beyond the long lake by this evening.  Can we get
across in time to head 'em off?"

"We must.  Of course we can!" Fred insisted.  "It's our only chance,
and you both know it.  We never could get home with our boots gone, and
with the food we have, but this venison will last us across to the
Smoke."

"Patch our boots up with the deerskin!" cried Mac.  "We'll ambush 'em.
We'll catch 'em on a hard carry.  Only let me get my hands on 'em!"

"Then we haven't a minute to lose!" said Horace.

"Let's be off!" cried Fred, springing up.

First of all, however, they repaired their tattered boots by folding
pieces of the raw deerhide round them and lashing them in place with
thongs.  It was clumsy work at the best; but Mac rolled up the rest of
the hide to take with him, in case they should have to make further
repairs.

Horace consulted the map and the compass again, and picked up the lump
of venison, which, with the deerskin, constituted their only luggage.
In less than half an hour from the time Fred had hit upon his plan they
were off, running through the undergrowth on the twenty-five-mile race
to the Smoke River.

None of them knew what sort of country the course would pass over.  The
map for that part of the region was incomplete and no more than
approximately accurate, so that the boys were not at all sure that
their guess at the distance to the Smoke River was correct.  But they
did know that now that they had started on the race, their lives
depended upon their winning it.  Fred took the lead at once, tearing
through the thickets, tripping, stumbling.

"Easy, there!" called Horace.  "We mustn't do ourselves up at the
start."

Fred slackened his pace somewhat, but continued to keep in front.  For
nearly a mile from the river the land sloped gently upward through
dense thickets of birch.  Then the birches thinned, and finally gave
way to evergreen, and the rising ground became rough with gravel and
rock.  The slope changed to undulating billows of hills, covered with
stone of every size, from gravel to small boulders, and over it all
grew a stubbly jungle of cedar and jack-pine, seldom more than six feet
high.

It was a rough, broken country, and the boys had to slacken their pace
somewhat; to make things worse, it presently began to rain.  First came
a driving drizzle, then a heavy downpour, with a strong southwest wind.
The rocks streamed with water, and the boys were drenched; but the
heavy rain presently settled again to a soaking drizzle that threatened
to continue all day.

Through the rain they struggled ahead; sometimes they found a clear
space where they could run; sometimes they came upon wet, tangled
shrubbery that impeded them sadly.  They kept hoping for easier
traveling; but those broken, rocky hills stretched ahead for miles.  At
last the trees became even more sparse, and the boys encountered a
whole hillside covered with a mass of split rock.

Over this litter of sandstone they crawled and stumbled at what seemed
a snail's pace.  They were desperately anxious to hurry, but they knew
that a slip on those wet rocks might mean a broken leg.

A rain-washed slope of gravel came next; they went down it at a trot,
and then encountered another hillside covered with huge, loose stones.
They scrambled over it as best they could, and ran down another slope;
then trees became more abundant, and soon they were again traveling
over low, rolling hills clothed in jack-pine scrub.

With marvelous endurance Fred still held the lead.  He went as if
driven by machinery, with his head down and his lips clenched; he did
not speak a word.  He was supposed to be the weakest of the party, but
even Macgregor, a trained cross-country runner, found himself falling
farther and farther behind.

At eleven o'clock Horace called a halt.  The rain had almost stopped,
and the boys, lighting a small fire, roasted generous slices of
venison.  There was no need of sparing the meat now.  Either plenty of
food or death was at the end of the journey.

No sooner had they eaten it than Fred sprang up again.

"How you fellows can sit here I can't understand!" he exclaimed,
nervously.  "I'm going on.  Are you coming?"

Mac and Horace followed him.  The land seemed to be sloping continually
to lower levels; the woods thickened into a sturdy, tangled growth of
hemlock and tamarack that they had hard work to penetrate.  They
presently caught a glimpse of water ahead, and came to the shore of a
small, narrow lake that curved away between rounded, dark hillsides.
They had to go round the lake, and lost two or three miles by the
detour.  As they hurried up the shore a bull moose sprang from the
water, paused an instant to look back, and crashed into the thickets.
It would have been an easy shot if they had had the rifle.

Round the end of the lake low hills rose abruptly from the shore.
After scrambling up the slippery slope of the hills they reached the
top, and saw ahead of them an endless stretch of wild hills and
forests; there was not a landmark that they recognized.

Horace guessed that they had come about fifteen miles.  Mac thought
that it was much more.  They agreed that they had broken the back of
the journey, and that if their strength held out, they could reach the
Smoke that day.

"Suppose we were--to find the diamond-beds now!" said Mac, between
quick breaths.

"Don't talk to me about diamonds!" said Horace.  "I never want to hear
the word again."

On they went, up and down the hills, through the thickets and over the
ridges; but they no longer went with the energy they had shown in the
morning.  With every mile their pace grew slower, and they were all
beginning to limp.  Fred still kept in front, with his face set in grim
determination.  About the middle of the afternoon Horace came up with
him, stopped him with a hand on his shoulder, and looked into his face.

Fred's eyes were bright and feverish.  His face was pale and spotted
with red blotches, and he breathed heavily through his open mouth.

"You've got to stop!" said his brother firmly.  "You're going on your
nerves.  A little farther, and you'll collapse--go down like a shot."

"I--I'm all right!" said Fred thickly.  "Got to get on--got to make it
in time!"

But Horace was firm.  First they built a smudge to keep off the flies;
then they made fresh repairs to their shoes; and finally they stretched
themselves flat to rest.  But in spite of their fatigue, they were too
highly strung to stay quiet.  They knew that a delay of an hour might
lose the race for them.  After resting for less than half an hour, they
got up and went plunging through the woods again.

They believed now that the Smoke River could not be more than five or
six miles away.  From every hilltop they hoped to catch sight of it, or
at least to see some spot that they had passed while prospecting.

But although all the landscape seemed strange, they doggedly continued
the struggle.  The sun was sinking low over the western ridges now;
toiling desperately on, they left mile after mile behind, but still the
Smoke River did not come into sight.  At last Macgregor sat down
abruptly upon a log.

"I'd just as soon die here as anywhere," he said.

"You're right.  We'll stop, and go on by moonrise," said Horace.
"Grub's what we need now."

"Why, we're almost at the end!  We can't stop now!" Fred cried.

"We won't lose anything," said his brother.  "The trappers will be
camping, too, about this time.  If we don't rest now we'll probably
never get to the Smoke at all."

Staggering with fatigue, he set about getting wood for a fire.  Mac and
Fred helped him, and when they had built a fire they broiled some of
the deer meat.  Fred could hardly touch the food.  Horace and Macgregor
ate only a little, and almost as they ate they nodded, and dropped
asleep from sheer fatigue.

Fred knew that he, too, ought to sleep, but he could not even lie down.
His brain burned, his muscles twitched, and he felt strung like a taut
wire.  Leaving his companions asleep, he started to scout ahead.  He
went like one in a dream, hardly conscious of anything except the
overwhelming necessity of getting forward.  His course took him over a
wooded ridge and down a hillside, and at last he came upon a tiny
creek.  Stumbling, sometimes falling, but always pushing on, he
followed the course of the creek for a mile or two; suddenly he found
himself on the shore of a large and rapid river, into which the creek
emptied.

Furious at the obstacle, he looked for a place where he could cross the
river.

It was too deep for him to wade across it, and too swift for him to
swim it.  He hurried up the bank, looking for a place where he could
ford it, and at last came to a stretch of short, violent rapids.

He was about to turn back when he caught sight of axe marks in the
undergrowth.  Some one had cut a trail for the carry round the rapid.
He stared at the axe marks, and then at the river.  Suddenly his dazed
brain cleared.

He recognized the spot.  He recognized the trail that he himself had
helped to cut.  He had found the Smoke River!




CHAPTER XVI

Fred never quite knew how he got back to camp after he had found the
river.  He found his companions still sound asleep, but it did not take
him long to rouse them and to tell them the news.

"I couldn't see any tracks on the shore.  I don't think any one has
passed," Fred said.

In less than a minute the boys, wild with joy, were hurrying through
the woods again.  It was almost dark when they reached the river;
peering close to the ground they examined the trail carefully, to make
sure that the trappers had not already passed.

The heavy rain had washed the shores, and no fresh tracks showed in the
mud.  The men had not been over the portage that day, and they could
hardly have passed the rapids without making a carry.  They had
evidently camped for the night at some point below, and would not come
up the river until morning.

After piling up some hemlock boughs for a bed, the boys lay down, and
dropped into a heavy sleep.  Now that the strain was over, Fred slept,
too.  In fact, for the last quarter of an hour he had hardly been able
to stay on his feet.

In the gray dawn Horace awakened them.  They were stiff from their
thirty-mile race of the day before, and their feet were swollen.  Hot
food--especially hot tea--was what they longed for; but they were
afraid to make a fire, and they had to content themselves with a little
raw venison for their breakfast.

Horace thought that they could make their ambush where they were as
well as anywhere else.  The portage was about thirty yards long, and
the narrow trail passed over a ridge and ran through dense hemlock
thickets.  If the trappers came up the trail in single file, carrying
heavy loads, they could not use their rifles against a sudden attack.

The boys armed themselves each with a hardwood bludgeon; then they
ensconced themselves in the thickets where they could see the reaches
of the river below--and waited.

An hour passed.  It was almost sunrise, and there was no sign of the
trappers on the river.  The boys grew nervous with dread and anxiety.
The tree-tops began to glitter with sunlight.  It was almost six
o'clock.

"Could they have gone some other way?" asked Fred uneasily, staring
upstream.

At that very moment Macgregor grasped his arm and pointed down the
river.  Two small objects had appeared round a bend, half a mile below.
They were certainly canoes, making slow headway against the stiff
current, but they were too far away for the boys to make them out
plainly.  Minute by minute they grew nearer.

"The front one's a Peterboro!" said Mac.  "There's one man in it, and
two in the other.  I think I can see the fox cage."

Without doubt it was the trappers.  The young prospectors slipped back
through the thickets, almost to the upper end of the trail, and
concealed themselves in the hemlocks.

"Above all things, try to get hold of their guns!" said Horace.

For a long while they waited in terrible suspense.  They could not see
the landing, nor at first could they hear anything, for the tumbling
water of the rapids roared in their ears.  After what seemed almost an
hour, stumbling footsteps sounded near by on the trail, and the bow of
the Peterboro hove in sight.  A man was carrying it on his head; he
steadied it with one hand, and in the other grasped a gun--Horace's
repeating rifle.

When he was almost within arm's reach, Mac sprang and tackled him low
like a football player.  The trapper dropped the gun with a startled
yell, and went over headlong into the hemlocks--canoe and all.

Horace leaped out to seize the gun that the man had dropped.  Before he
could touch it, the second trapper rushed up the trail with his rifle
clubbed.  Fred struck out at him with his bludgeon.  The blow missed
the fellow's head, and fell on his arm.  Down clattered the rifle,
discharging as it fell.  The trapper made a frantic leap aside, and
disappeared into the bushes.

As Fred snatched up the rifle, he caught a glimpse of the third
trapper, the wiry half-breed, hastening up the path.

"Halt!  Hands up!" shouted Horace, raising the repeater.

The man stopped, fired a wild shot, turned and bolted back toward the
landing.  Fred and his brother rushed after him; they reached the
landing just in time to see him leap into the birch canoe, which still
held the fox cage, shove off, and digging his paddle furiously into the
water, shoot down the stream.

"After him!  The canoe!  Quick!" shouted Horace.

They dashed back.  The man that Fred had struck was nowhere to be seen.
Macgregor had pinned his antagonist to the ground, and seemed to have
him well subdued.

"Never mind him, Mac!" Fred cried.  "Pick up that canoe in a hurry!
One of the scoundrels has got away with the foxes!"

All three of them seized the canoe and rushed it down to the landing.
There they found the shore strewn with articles of camp outfit where
the men had unloaded the canoes.

"Load it in, boys!" cried Horace.  "Take what we need.  We're not
coming back."

They pitched an armful or two of supplies into the canoe.  Fred's
shotgun was there, and several other articles that the boys recognized
as their own.  The rest was a fair exchange for the outfit that they
had abandoned in their tent.

They shoved the canoe off.  The half-breed had gained a long lead by
this time.  He was nearly a quarter of a mile ahead, paddling
frantically; he did not even stop to fire at the boys.  But there were
three paddles in pursuit, and the boys began to gain on him noticeably.
More than two miles flashed by, and then the roar of rapids sounded
ahead.

"Got him!" panted Mac.  "He'll have to land now."

Round another bend shot the birch canoe, with the Peterboro three
hundred yards behind, and now the broken water came in sight.  It was a
long, rock-staked chute, and the boys thought it would be suicidal to
try to run it.  But the half-breed kept straight on in mid-channel.

"He's going to try to run through!" Horace cried.  "He'll drown himself
and the foxes!"

The boys yelled at him; but the next instant the man's canoe had shot
into the broken water.  For a moment they lost sight of him in a cloud
of spray; then they saw him half-way down the rapids, going like a
bullet.  With incredible skill, he was keeping his craft upright.

The boys drove their canoe toward the landing, and still watched the
man.  When he was almost through the rapids, they saw his canoe shoot
bow upward into the air, hang a moment, and then go over.

Shouting with excitement, they dragged the canoe ashore, picked it up,
and went over the portage at a run.  Far down the stream they saw the
birch canoe floating on its side, near the fox cage.  They had just
launched the Peterboro at the tail of the rapids, when they saw
something black bobbing in the swirling water.

It was the head of the half-breed.  He was swimming feebly, and when
they hauled him into the canoe, was almost unconscious.  He had a great
bleeding gash just above his ear, where he had struck a rock; but he
was not seriously injured.  The boys paid little attention to him, but
hastened to rescue their treasure.  When they came up with the birch
canoe, they found that the fox cage had been lashed to it with a strip
of deerskin, and, to their great relief, that the foxes were there, all
four of them, alive and afloat.

They got the cage ashore as quickly as possible.  The foxes were
dripping with water, but looked as lively as ever.  To all appearances,
the ducking had not hurt them.

The canoe itself had not come off so well.  It had a great rent in the
bottom, and Horace stamped another hole through the bow.  Then the boys
examined their new outfit.  From their own former store they had a
kettle, a frying-pan, a box of rifle-cartridges, and a sack of tea.
They had taken from the trappers' supplies half a sack of flour, a lump
of salt pork, two blankets, and two rifles.

The half-breed had recovered his wits by this time; sitting on the
bank, he glared savagely at them.

"You'll find your partners waiting for you up the river," Horace said
to him.  "We've got what we need, and you'll find the rest of your kit
on the shore where you unpacked it.  As for your rifles--"

He picked them up and tossed them into six feet of water.  "By the time
you've fished them out and mended your canoe I guess you won't want to
follow us.  If you do, you won't catch us napping again, and we'll
shoot you on sight.  _Savez_?"

The half-breed muttered some sullen response.  The boys loaded the fox
cage into the Peterboro, got in themselves, and shot down the river
again in a fresh start for home.  They left the trapper sitting on the
rock, glaring after them.

Now that the strain was over and the fight won, the boys felt utterly
exhausted.  They kept on at as fast a pace as they could, however, and
reached the Missanabie River a little after noon.  There they stopped
to cook dinner.

Once more they had hot, black _voyageurs'_ tea, and fried flapjacks,
and salt pork.  It seemed the most delicious meal they had ever eaten;
but when they had finished, they felt too weary to start up the
Missanabie, and reckless of consequences, they lay down and slept for
almost two hours.

Then they continued their journey with double energy, and made good
progress for the rest of the day.

They were entirely out of fresh meat, and had nothing whatever to give
the foxes, but fortunately Mac shot three spruce grouse that evening.
They dropped the heads of the birds into the cage; the foxes devoured
them with a voracity that indicated that the trappers had fed them
nothing.  Early the next morning Horace by a long shot killed a deer at
the riverside.

It was a rough journey up the Missanabie, but not nearly so hard as the
trip up the Smoke River had been.  For eight days they paddled, poled,
tracked, and portaged, until they came at last to the point where they
had first launched the canoe.

The "long carry" over the Height of Land now confronted them.  It is
true that they had by no means so much outfit to carry now, but, on the
other hand, they had no packers to help them.  They had to make two
journeys of it, and, as a further difficulty, one of the boys had to
remain with the fox cage.  As they reached the top of the ridge on
their first journey, Macgregor turned and looked back over the wild
landscape to the northwest.

"Somewhere over there," he murmured, "is the diamond country."

"Shut up!" exclaimed Horace, in exasperation.

"I never want to hear the word 'diamond' again," added Fred.

They left the foxes together with the rest of their loads at the end of
the "carry," and Fred remained to guard them, while Peter and Horace
went back for the remainder of the outfit.  While they were gone Fred
noticed that one of the cubs was not looking well.  It refused to eat
or drink; its fur was losing its gloss, and it lay in a sort of a doze
most of the time.  Plainly captivity did not agree with it.

Horace and Peter were much concerned about its condition when they came
back.  None of them had any idea what to do; in fact it is doubtful if
the most skilled veterinary surgeon could have prescribed.

"The real trouble is their cramped quarters, of course," said Horace.
"We must get home as quickly as possible, and get them out of this and
into a larger cage.  Some of the others will sicken if we don't look
sharp."

They made all the speed they could, and, now that they were fairly on
the canoe route south of the Height of Land, they felt that they were
well toward home.  It was downstream now, and portages grew less and
less frequent as the river grew.  They did not stop to hunt or fish;
the paddled till dusk, and were up at dawn.  They felt that it was a
race for the life of the valuable little animal, and they did not spare
themselves.  Two days afterward, late in the afternoon, they came to
the little railway village that had been their starting-point.

The cub seemed no better--worse, if anything.  There was a train for
Toronto at eight o'clock that night.  The boys hurried to the hotel
where they had left their baggage, and changed their tattered woods
garments for more civilized clothing.  There was time to eat a
civilized supper, with bread and vegetables and jam,--almost forgotten
luxuries,--and time also to send a telegram to Maurice Stark.

They carried the cage of foxes to the hotel with them, for they were
determined henceforth not to let the animals out of their sight for a
moment.  The unusual spectacle of the three boys with their burden
attracted much attention, and when the contents of the cage became
known, nearly the whole population of the village assembled to have a
look.

The crowd followed them to the depot, and saw the foxes put into the
baggage-car.  They had secured permission for one of them to ride with
the cage and stand guard, and the boys took turns at this duty.  The
other two tried to snatch a few hours of rest in the sleeper; but the
berths seemed stifling and airless.  Accustomed to the open camp, they
could not sleep a wink, and were rather more fatigued the next morning
than when they had started.  It was still four hours to Toronto, but
they reached the city at noon.  Macgregor was standing the last watch
in the baggage-car, and as Fred and Horace came down the steps of the
Pullman they saw Maurice Stark pushing through the crowd.

"What luck?" Maurice demanded anxiously, lowering his voice as he shook
hands.  "Did you find the--the--?"

"Not any diamonds," replied Fred, with a laugh.  "But we brought back
some black gold.  Come and see it."

They went forward to the platform where the baggage was being unloaded.
Macgregor was helping to hand out the willow cage.  It looked strangely
wild and rough among the neat suit-cases and trunks.

"What in the world have you got there?" cried Maurice, peering through
the bars.

Fred and Horace were also looking anxiously to learn the condition of
the sick cub.

"Why, he's dead!" exclaimed Fred, in bitter disappointment.

"Yes," said Mac; "the little fellow keeled over just after I came on
guard.  I didn't send word to you fellows, for I knew there was nothing
to be done."

The rest of the family were alive and looked in good condition.  The
boys had already decided what they would do immediately, and, calling a
cab, they drove with the foxes to the house of a well-known naturalist
connected with the Toronto Zoological Park.  He was as competent as any
one could be, and he readily agreed to take care of the foxes till they
should be sold.

Naturally, however, he declined to be responsible for their safety, and
Horace at once attempted to insure their lives.  No insurance company
would accept the risk, but after much negotiation he at last managed to
effect a policy of two thousand dollars for one month, on payment of an
exorbitant premium.  He was more successful in getting insurance
against theft, and took out a policy for ten thousand dollars with a
burglar insurance company, on condition of a day and night watchman
being employed to guard the animals.

It was plain that the foxes were going to be a source of terrible
anxiety while they remained on the boys' hands.  Horace at once
telegraphed to the manager of one of the largest fur-breeding ranches
in Prince Edward Island, and received a reply saying that a
representative of the company would call within a few days.

The man turned up three days later, and inspected the foxes in a casual
and uninterested way.

"We'd hardly think of buying," he remarked.  "We've got about all the
stock we need.  I was coming to Toronto just when I got your wire, and
I thought I'd look in at them.  What are you thinking of asking for
them?"

"Fifty thousand dollars," said Horace.

The fur-trader laughed heartily.

"You'll be lucky if you get a quarter of that," he said.  "Why, we
bought a fine, full-grown black fox last year for five hundred.  Your
cubs are hardly worth anything, you know.  They 're almost sure to die
before they grow up."

"Professor Forsythe doesn't think so," replied Horace.

"Well, I'm glad I saw them," said the dealer.  "If I can hear of a
buyer for you I'll send him along, but you'll have to come away down on
your prices.  You might let me have your address, in case I hear of
anything."

"It doesn't look as if we were going to sell them!" said Fred, who was
not used to shrewd business dealing.  "Perhaps we can't get any price
at all."

Horace laughed.

"Oh, that was all bluff.  I saw the fellow's eyes light up when he saw
these black beauties.  He'll be back to see us within a day or two."

Sure enough, the man did come back.  He scarcely mentioned the foxes
this time, but took the boys out motoring.  As they were parting he
said carelessly, "I think I might get you a buyer for your foxes, but
he couldn't pay over fifteen thousand."

"No use in our talking to him then," replied Horace, with equal
indifference.

That was the beginning of a series of negotiations that ran through
fully a week.  It was interspersed with motor rides, dinner parties,
and other amusements to which the parties treated one another
alternately.  The Prince Edward Island man brought himself to make a
proposal of twenty thousand, and Horace came down to thirty-five
thousand, and there they stuck.  Finally Horace came down to thirty.

"I'll give you twenty-five," said the furbreeder at last, "but I think
I'll be losing money at that."

"I'll meet you halfway," replied Horace.  "Split the difference.  Make
it twenty-seven thousand, five hundred."

Both parties were well wearied with bargaining by this time, and the
buyer gave in.

"All right!" he agreed.  "You'll make your fortune, young man, if you
keep on, for you 're the hardest customer to deal with that I've met
this year."

The dealer went back next day to the east, taking the foxes with him,
and leaving with the boys a certified check for $27,500.  It was not as
much as they had hoped to clear, but it was a small fortune after all.

"Comes to nearly seven thousand apiece," Fred remarked.

"Not at all," remonstrated Maurice.  "I don't see where I have any
share in it."

"Oh, come!  We're rolling in money.  You must have something out of it.
Mustn't he, Horace?"

They knew that Maurice really needed the money, and it was not by his
own will that he had failed to go with the expedition.  In the end he
was persuaded to accept the odd five hundred dollars, but he refused to
take a cent more.  The remainder made just nine thousand dollars apiece
for each of the three other boys.

"I've lost a year's varsity work," said Peter, "but I guess it was
worth it.  Nine thousand is more than I ever expect to make in a year
of medical practice.  Besides, we know there are diamonds in that
country.  Horace found them.  Why can't we--"

"Shut up!" cried Fred.

"Take his money away from him!" exclaimed Horace.  "I don't want to
hear any more of diamonds."

"--And why can't we make another expedition," continued Peter, "and
prospect for--"  But Fred and Horace pounced on him, and after a
violent struggle got him down on the couch.

"Prospect for what?" cried Fred, sitting on his chest.

"Ow--let me up!" gurgled Mac.  "Why, for--for more black foxes!"




THE END




The Riverside Press

CAMBRIDGE . MASSACHUSETTS

U . S . A




Dr. Tomlinson's Books

The American boy will never tire of reading tales of the early colonial
days and especially of the desperate encounters and struggles of the
colonists with the natives of the forest.

Dr. Tomlinson has read widely and has collected a mass of incident
through family tradition and otherwise, which he has skillfully
incorporated in the historical frameworks of several exceedingly
interesting and instructive stories.  He has the knack of mixing
history with adventure in such a way as to make his young readers
absorb much information while entertaining them capitally.  His
historical tales are filled with an enthusiasm which it is well to
foster in the heart of every healthy-minded and patriotic American boy.

The plots are all based upon events that actually occurred; and the boy
heroes play the part of men in a way to capture the hearts of all boy
readers.  Dr. Tomlinson shows scrupulous regard for the larger truths
of history, and the same care that would naturally go into a book for
older readers.


The Boys of Old Monmouth

A story of Washington's campaign in New Jersey in 1778.


A Jersey Boy in the Revolution

This story is founded upon the lives and deeds of some of the humbler
heroes of the American Revolution.


In the Hands of the Redcoats

A tale of the Jersey ship and the Jersey shore in the days of the
Revolution.


Under Colonial Colors

The story of Arnold's expedition to Quebec; of war, adventure, and
friendship.


A Lieutenant Under Washington

A tale of Brandywine and Germantown.


The Rider of the Black Horse

A spirited Revolutionary story following the adventures of one of
Washington's couriers.


The Red Chief

A story of the massacre at Cherry Valley, of Brant, the Mohawk chief,
and of the Revolution in upper New York state.


Marching Against the Iroquois

An exciting story based on General Sullivan's expedition into the
country of the Iroquois in 1779.


Light Horse Harry's Legion

A stirring story of fights with marauding Tories on the Jersey Pine
Barrens.


The Camp-Fire of Mad Anthony

This story covers the period between 1774 and 1776 and follows the
adventures of the Pennsylvania troops under "Mad Anthony" Wayne.


Mad Anthony's Young Scout

A story of the winter of 1777-1778.


The Champion of the Regiment

An absorbing story of the Siege of Yorktown, with Noah Dare, so well
known to Tomlinson readers, for hero.


The Young Minute-Man of 1812

The young hero joins the garrison at Sacket's Harbor, is sent on an
expedition down the St. Lawrence, and takes part in McDonough's victory
on Lake Champlain.


The Young Sharpshooter

The experiences of a boy in the Peninsular Campaign of 1862, under
McClellan.


The Young Sharpshooter at Antietam

Deals with Lee's invasion of Maryland in 1862, relating further
exciting adventures of Noel, the young sharpshooter.


Prisoners of War

The experiences of the heroes of "The Young Sharpshooter" and "The
Young Sharpshooter at Antietam," during the course of the war from
Antietam to Appomattox.


Each volume, illustrated, crown 8vo, $1.35 net.

Houghton Mifflin Company

Boston and New York



BOOKS BY

ARTHUR STANWOOD PIER

"Some of the best boys' stories of the time carry Mr. Pier's name on
the title page.  His Boys of St. Timothy's books have always been
popular with young readers.  They are wholesome, lively, entertaining
tales of schoolboy life and sports."--_Detroit Free Press_.


THE JESTER OF ST. TIMOTHY'S

Illustrated.  12mo, $1.00 net.


THE CRASHAW BROTHERS

Illustrated.  12mo, $1.25 net.


THE NEW BOY

Illustrated, 12mo, $1.25 net.


HARDING OF ST. TIMOTHY'S

Illustrated.  12mo, $1.25 net.


GRANNIS OF THE FIFTH

Illustrated, 12mo, $1.25 net.



HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY

BOSTON AND NEW YORK











End of Project Gutenberg's Northern Diamonds, by Frank Lillie Pollock

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NORTHERN DIAMONDS ***

***** This file should be named 32323.txt or 32323.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/3/2/32323/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
