The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Book of Buried Treasure, by Ralph D. Paine

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Book of Buried Treasure
       Being a True History of the Gold, Jewels, and Plate of
       Pirates, Galleons, etc., which are sought for to this day

Author: Ralph D. Paine

Release Date: August 1, 2010 [EBook #33318]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF BURIED TREASURE ***




Produced by Al Haines









[Frontispiece: H.M.S. _Lutine_ leaving Yarmouth Roads, Oct. 9, 1799, on
her last voyage.  (_From the painting by Frank Mason, R.A., in the
Committee Room of Lloyd's, London._)  _See Chapter XI._]





THE BOOK OF

BURIED TREASURE



  BEING A TRUE HISTORY OF THE GOLD, JEWELS,
  AND PLATE OF PIRATES, GALLEONS, ETC.,
  WHICH ARE SOUGHT FOR TO THIS DAY



BY

RALPH D. PAINE

Author of "The Ships and Sailors of Old Salem," etc.




ILLUSTRATED




London

William Heinemann

1911




Copyright 1911

By METROPOLITAN MAGAZINE COMPANY


Copyright 1911

By STURGIS & WALTON COMPANY


Set up and electrotyped.  Published September, 1911




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

    I  THE WORLD-WIDE HUNT FOR VANISHED RICHES
   II  CAPTAIN KIDD IN FACT AND FICTION
  III  CAPTAIN KIDD, HIS TREASURE
   IV  CAPTAIN KIDD, HIS TRIAL AND DEATH
    V  THE WONDROUS FORTUNE OF WILLIAM PHIPS
   VI  THE BOLD SEA ROGUE, JOHN QUELCH
  VII  THE ARMADA GALLEON OF TOBERMORY BAY
 VIII  THE LOST PLATE FLEET OF VIGO
   IX  THE PIRATES' HOARD OF TRINIDAD
    X  THE LURE OF COCOS ISLAND
   XI  THE MYSTERY OF THE LUTINE FRIGATE
  XII  THE TOILERS OF THE THETIS
 XIII  THE QUEST OF EL DORADO
  XIV  THE WIZARDRY OF THE DIVINING ROD
   XV  SUNDRY PIRATES AND THEIR BOOTY
  XVI  PRACTICAL HINTS FOR TREASURE SEEKERS




ILLUSTRATIONS


H. M. S. _Lutine_ leaving Yarmouth Roads, Oct. 9, 1799, on her last
  voyage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _Frontispiece_


Treasure-seekers' Camp at Cape Vidal on African Coast

Divers searching wreck of Treasure-ship _Dorothea_, Cape Vidal, Africa

Captain Kidd burying his Bible

Carousing at Old Calabar River

The Idle Apprentice goes to sea

John Gardiner's sworn statement of the goods and treasure left with him
by Kidd

Governor Bellomont's endorsement of the official inventory of Kidd's
treasure found on Gardiner's Island

The official inventory of the Kidd treasure found on Gardiner's Island

A memorandum of Captain Kidd's treasure left on Gardiner's Island

Statement of Edward Davis, who sailed home with Kidd, concerning the
landing of the treasure and goods

The French pass or safe conduct paper found by Kidd in the ship _Quedah
Merchant_

Kidd hanging in chains

"The Pirates' Stairs" leading to the site of Execution Dock at Wapping
where Kidd was hanged

Sir William Phips, first royal governor of Massachusetts

Map of Hispaniola (Hayti and San Domingo) engraved in 1723, showing the
buccaneers at their trade of hunting wild cattle

Permit issued by Sir William Phips as royal governor in which he uses
the title "Vice-Admiral" which involved him in disastrous quarrels

The oldest existing print of Boston harbor as it appeared in the time
of Sir William Phips, showing the kind of ships in which he sailed to
find his treasure

An ancient map of Jamaica showing the haunts of the pirates and the
track of the treasure galleons

The town and bay of Tobermory, Island of Mull

Duart Castle, chief stronghold of the MacLeans

Ardnamurchan Castle, seat of the MacIans and the MacDonalds

Defeat of the Spanish Armada

Diving to find the treasure galleon in Tobermory Bay

The salvage steamer _Breamer_ equipped with suction dredge removing a
sandbank from the supposed location of the _Florencia_ galleon in 1909

Scabbards, flasks, cannon balls, and small objects recovered from the
sunken Armada galleon

Stone cannon balls and breech-block of a breech-loading gun fished up
from the wreck of the _Florencia_ galleon

Sir George Rooke, commanding the British fleet at the battle of Vigo Bay

_The Royal Sovereign_, one of Admiral Sir George Rooke's line-of-battle
ships, engaged at Vigo Bay

Framework of an "elevator" devised by Pino for raising the galleons in
Vigo Bay

An "elevator" with air bags inflated

Cannon of the treasure galleons recovered by Pino from the bottom of
Vigo Bay

Hydroscope invented by Pino for exploring the sea bottom and
successfully used in finding the galleons of Vigo Bay

Lima Cathedral

Treasure-seekers digging on Cocos Island

Christian Cruse, the hermit treasure-seeker of Cocos Island

Thetis Cove in calm weather, showing salvage operations

Thetis Cove during the storm which wrecked the salvage equipment

Sir Walter Raleigh

Methods of manipulating the diving rod to find buried treasure

Gibbs and Wansley burying the treasure

The Portuguese captain cutting away the bag of moidores

Interview between Lafitte, General Andrew Jackson, and Governor
Claiborne

The death of Black Beard




THE BOOK OF BURIED TREASURE




  Of all the lives I ever say,
    A Pirate's be for I.
  Hap what hap may he's allus gay
    An' drinks an' bungs his eye.
  For his work he's never loth:
    An' a-pleasurin' he'll go;
  Tho' certain sure to be popt off,
    Yo, ho, with the rum below!

  In Bristowe I left Poll ashore,
    Well stored wi' togs an' gold,
  An' off I goes to sea for more,
    A-piratin' so bold.
  An' wounded in the arm I got,
    An' then a pretty blow;
  Comed home I find Poll's flowed away,
    Yo, ho, with the rum below!

  An' when my precious leg was lopt,
    Just for a bit of fun,
  I picks it up, on t'other hopt,
    An' rammed it in a gun.
  "What's that for?" cries out Salem Dick;
    "What for, my jumpin' beau?
  "Why, to give the lubbers one more kick!"
    Yo, ho, with the rum below!

  I 'llows this crazy hull o' mine
    At sea has had its share:
  Marooned three times an' wounded nine
    An' blowed up in the air.
  But ere to Execution Bay
    The wind these bones do blow,
  I'll drink an' fight what's left away,
    Yo, ho, with the rum below!

            --_An Old English Ballad_.




THE BOOK OF BURIED TREASURE


CHAPTER I

THE WORLD-WIDE HUNT FOR VANISHED RICHES

The language has no more boldly romantic words than _pirate_ and
_galleon_ and the dullest imagination is apt to be kindled by any
plausible dream of finding their lost treasures hidden on lonely beach
or tropic key, or sunk fathoms deep in salt water.  In the preface of
that rare and exceedingly diverting volume, "The Pirates' Own Book,"
the unnamed author sums up the matter with so much gusto and with so
gorgeously appetizing a flavor that he is worth quoting to this extent:

"With the name of pirate is also associated ideas of rich plunder,
caskets of buried jewels, chests of gold ingots, bags of outlandish
coins, secreted in lonely, out of the way places, or buried about the
wild shores of rivers and unexplored sea coasts, near rocks and trees
bearing mysterious marks indicating where the treasure was hid.  And as
it is his invariable practice to secrete and bury his booty, and from
the perilous life he leads, being often killed or captured, he can
never revisit the spot again, therefore immense sums remain buried in
those places and are irrevocably lost.  Search is often made by persons
who labor in anticipation of throwing up with their spade and pickaxe,
gold bars, diamond crosses sparkling amongst the dirt, bags of golden
doubloons and chests wedged close with moidores, ducats and pearls; but
although great treasures lie hid in this way, it seldom happens that
any is recovered."[1]

In this tamed, prosaic age of ours, treasure-seeking might seem to be
the peculiar province of fiction, but the fact is that expeditions are
fitting out every little while, and mysterious schooners flitting from
many ports, lured by grimy, tattered charts presumed to show where the
hoards were hidden, or steering their courses by nothing more tangible
than legend and surmise.  As the Kidd tradition survives along the
Atlantic coast, so on divers shores of other seas persist the same kind
of wild tales, the more convincing of which are strikingly alike in
that the lone survivor of the red-handed crew, having somehow escaped
the hanging, shooting, or drowning that he handsomely merited,
preserved a chart showing where the treasure had been hid.  Unable to
return to the place, he gave the parchment to some friend or shipmate,
this dramatic transfer usually happening as a death-bed ceremony.  The
recipient, after digging in vain and heartily damning the departed
pirate for his misleading landmarks and bearings, handed the chart down
to the next generation.

It will be readily perceived that this is the stock motive of almost
all buried treasure fiction, the trademark of a certain brand of
adventure story, but it is really more entertaining to know that such
charts and records exist and are made use of by the expeditions of the
present day.  Opportunity knocks at the door.  He who would gamble in
shares of such a speculation may find sun-burned, tarry gentlemen, from
Seattle to Singapore, and from Capetown to New Zealand, eager to
whisper curious information of charts and sailing directions, and to
make sail and away.

Some of them are still seeking booty lost on Cocos Island off the coast
of Costa Rica where a dozen expeditions have futilely sweated and dug;
others have cast anchor in harbors of Guam and the Carolines; while as
you run from Aden to Vladivostock, sailormen are never done with
spinning yarns of treasure buried by the pirates of the Indian Ocean
and the China Sea.  Out from Callao the treasure hunters fare to
Clipperton Island, or the Gallapagos group where the buccaneers with
Dampier and Davis used to careen their ships, and from Valparaiso many
an expedition has found its way to Juan Fernandez and Magellan Straits.
The topsails of these salty argonauts have been sighted in recent years
off the Salvages to the southward of Madeira where two millions of
Spanish gold were buried in chests, and pick and shovel have been busy
on rocky Trinidad in the South Atlantic which conceals vast stores of
plate and jewels left there by pirates who looted the galleons of Lima.

Near Cape Vidal, on the coast of Zululand, lies the wreck of the
notorious sailing vessel _Dorothea_, in whose hold is treasure to the
amount of two million dollars in gold bars concealed beneath a flooring
of cement.  It was believed for some time that the ill-fated _Dorothea_
was fleeing with the fortune of Oom Paul Kruger on board when she was
cast ashore.  The evidence goes to show, however, that certain
officials of the Transvaal Government, before the Boer War, issued
permits to several lawless adventurers, allowing them to engage in
buying stolen gold from the mines.  This illicit traffic flourished
largely, and so successful was this particular combination that a ship
was bought, the _Ernestine_, and after being overhauled and renamed the
_Dorothea_, she secretly shipped the treasure on board in Delagoa Bay.

It was only the other day that a party of restless young Americans
sailed in the old racing yacht _Mayflower_ bound out to seek the wreck
of a treasure galleon on the coast of Jamaica.  Their vessel was
dismasted and abandoned at sea, and they had all the adventure they
yearned for.  One of them, Roger Derby of Boston, of a family famed for
its deep-water mariners in the olden times, ingenuously confessed some
time later, and here you have the spirit of the true treasure-seeker:

"I am afraid that there is no information accessible in documentary or
printed form of the wreck that we investigated a year ago.  Most of it
is hearsay, and when we went down there on a second trip after losing
the _Mayflower_, we found little to prove that a galleon had been lost,
barring some old cannon, flint rock ballast, and square iron bolts.  We
found absolutely no gold."

======================================================================

[Illustration: Treasure-seekers' Camp at Cape Vidal on African coast.]

Divers searching wreck of Treasure ship Dorothea, Cape Vidal, Africa.

======================================================================

The coast of Madagascar, once haunted by free-booters who plundered the
rich East Indiamen, is still ransacked by treasure seekers, and
American soldiers in the Philippines indefatigably excavate the
landscape of Luzon in the hope of finding the hoard of Spanish gold
buried by the Chinese mandarin Chan Lu Suey in the eighteenth century.
Every island of the West Indies and port of the Spanish Main abounds in
legends of the mighty sea rogues whose hard fate it was to be laid by
the heels before they could squander the gold that had been won with
cutlass, boarding pike and carronade.

The spirit of true adventure lives in the soul of the treasure hunter.
The odds may be a thousand to one that he will unearth a solitary
doubloon, yet he is lured to undertake the most prodigious exertions by
the keen zest of the game itself.  The English novelist, George R.
Sims, once expressed this state of mind very exactly.  "Respectable
citizens, tired of the melancholy sameness of a drab existence, cannot
take to crape masks, dark lanterns, silent matches, and rope ladders,
but they can all be off to a pirate island and search for treasure and
return laden or empty without a stain upon their characters.  I know a
fine old pirate who sings a good song and has treasure islands at his
fingers' ends.  I think I can get together a band of adventurers,
middle-aged men of established reputation in whom the public would have
confidence, who would be only too glad to enjoy a year's romance."

Robert Louis Stevenson who dearly loved a pirate and wrote the finest
treasure story of them all around a proper chart of his own devising,
took Henry James to task for confessing that although he had been a
child he had never been on a quest for buried treasure.  "Here is
indeed a willful paradox," exclaimed the author of "Treasure Island,"
"for if he has never been on a quest for buried treasure, it can be
demonstrated that he has never been a child.  There never was a child
(unless Master James), but has hunted gold, and been a pirate, and a
military commander, and a bandit of the mountains; but has fought, and
suffered shipwreck and prison, and imbrued its little hands in gore,
and gallantly retrieved the lost battle, and triumphantly protected
innocence and beauty."

Mark Twain also indicated the singular isolation of Henry James by
expressing precisely the same opinion in his immortal chronicle of the
adventures of Tom Sawyer.  "There comes a time in every rightly
constructed boy's life when he has a raging desire to go somewhere and
dig for buried treasure."  And what an entrancing career Tom had
planned for himself in an earlier chapter!  "At the zenith of his fame,
how he would suddenly appear at the old village and stalk into church,
brown and weather-beaten, in his black velvet doublet and trunks, his
great jack-boots, his crimson sash, his belt bristling with
horse-pistols, his crime-rusted cutlass at his side, his slouch hat
with waving plumes, his black flag unfurled, with the skull and
cross-bones on it, and hear with swelling ecstasy the whisperings,
'It's Tom Sawyer the Pirate!--The Black Avenger of the Spanish Main.'"

When Tom and Huck Finn went treasure seeking they observed the
time-honored rules of the game, as the following dialogue will recall
to mind:

"Where'll we dig?" said Huck.

"Oh, most anywhere."

"Why, is it hid all around?"

"No, indeed it ain't.  It's hid in mighty particular places, Huck,
sometimes on islands, sometimes in rotten chests under the limb of an
old dead tree, just where the shadow falls at midnight; but mostly
under the floor in ha'nted houses."

"Who hides it?"

"Why, robbers, of course.  Who'd you reckon, Sunday-school
superintendents?"

"I don't know.  If 'twas mine I wouldn't hide it; I'd spend it and have
a good time."

"So would I.  But robbers don't do that way.  They always hide it and
leave it there."

"Don't they come after it any more!"

"No, they think they will, but they generally forget the marks or else
they die.  Anyway, it lays there a long time and gets rusty; and by and
by somebody finds an old yellow paper that tells how to find the
marks,--a paper that's got to be ciphered over about a week because
it's mostly signs and hy'roglyphics."

Hunting lost treasure is not work but a fascinating kind of play that
belongs to the world of make believe.  It appeals to that strain of
boyishness which survives in the average man even though his pow be
frosted, his reputation starched and conservative.  It is, after all,
an inherited taste handed down from the golden age of fairies.  The
folk-lore of almost every race is rich in buried treasure stories.  The
pirate with his stout sea chest hidden above high-water mark is
lineally descended from the enchanting characters who lived in the
shadow land of myth and fable.  The hoard of Captain Kidd, although he
was turned off at Execution Dock only two hundred years ago, has become
as legendary as the dream of the pot of gold at the end of the rainbow.

Many a hard-headed farmer and fisherman of the New England coast
believes that it is rash business to go digging for Kidd's treasure
unless one carefully performs certain incantations designed to placate
the ghostly guardian who aforetime sailed with Kidd and was slain by
him after the hole was dug lest the secret might thus be revealed.  And
it is of course well known that if a word is spoken after the pick has
clinked against the iron-bound chest or metal pot, the devil flies away
with the treasure, leaving behind him only panic and a strong smell of
brimstone.

Such curious superstitions as these, strongly surviving wherever pirate
gold is sought, have been the common property of buried-treasure
stories in all ages.  The country-folk of Japan will tell you that if a
pot of money is found a rice cake must be left in place of every coin
taken away, and imitation money burned as an offering to any spirit
that may be offended by the removal of the hoard.  The negroes of the
West Indies explain that the buried wealth of the buccaneers is seldom
found because the spirits that watch over it have a habit of whisking
the treasure away to parts unknown as soon as ever the hiding-place is
disturbed.  Among the Bedouins is current the legend that immense
treasures were concealed by Solomon beneath the foundations of Palmyra
and that sapient monarch took the precaution of enlisting an army of
jinns to guard the gold forever more.

In parts of Bohemia the peasants are convinced that a blue light hovers
above the location of buried treasure, invisible to all mortal eyes
save those of the person destined to find it.  In many corners of the
world there has long existed the belief in the occult efficacy of a
black cock or a black cat in the equipment of a treasure quest which is
also influenced by the particular phases of the moon.  A letter written
from Bombay as long ago as 1707, contained a quaint account of an
incident inspired by this particular superstition.

"Upon a dream of a Negro girl of Mahim that there was a Mine of
Treasure, who being overheard relating it, Domo, Alvares, and some
others went to the place and sacrificed a Cock and dugg the ground but
found nothing.  They go to Bundarra at Salsett, where disagreeing, the
Government there takes notice of the same, and one of them, an
inhabitant of Bombay, is sent to the Inquisition at Goa, which
proceedings will discourage the Inhabitants.  Wherefore the General is
desired to issue a proclamation to release him, and if not restored in
twenty days, no Roman Catholick Worship to be allowed on the Island."

A more recent chronicler, writing in _The Ceylon Times_, had this to
say:

"It is the belief of all Orientals that hidden treasures are under the
guardianship of supernatural beings.  The Cingalese divide the charge
between the demons and the cobra da capello (guardian of the king's
ankus in Kipling's story).  Various charms are resorted to by those who
wish to gain the treasure because the demons require a sacrifice.  The
blood of a human being is the most important, but so far as is known,
the Cappowas have hitherto confined themselves to the sacrifice of a
white cock, combining its blood with their own drawn from the hand or
foot."

No more fantastic than this are the legends of which the British Isles
yield a plentiful harvest.  Thomas of Walsingham tells the tale of a
Saracen physician who betook himself to Earl Warren of the fourteenth
century to ask courteous permission that he might slay a dragon, or
"loathly worm" which had its den at Bromfield near Ludlow and had
wrought sad ravages on the Earl's lands.  The Saracen overcame the
monster, whether by means of his medicine chest or his trusty steel the
narrator sayeth not, and then it was learned that a great hoard of gold
was hidden in its foul den.  Some men of Herefordshire sallied forth by
night to search for the treasure, and were about to lay hands on it
when retainers of the Earl of Warwick captured them and took the booty
to their lord.

Blenkinsopp Castle is haunted by a very sorrowful White Lady.  Her
husband, Bryan de Blenkinsopp, was uncommonly greedy of gold, which he
loved better than his wife, and she, being very jealous and angry, was
mad enough to hide from him a chest of treasure so heavy that twelve
strong men were needed to lift it.  Later she was overtaken by remorse
because of this undutiful behavior and to this day her uneasy ghost
flits about the castle, supposedly seeking the spirit of Bryan de
Blenkinsopp in order that she may tell him what she did with his pelf.

When Corfe Castle in Dorsetshire was besieged by Cromwell's troops,
Lady Bankes conducted a heroic defense.  Betrayed by one of her own
garrison, and despairing of holding out longer, she threw all the plate
and jewels into a very deep well in the castle yard, and pronounced a
curse against anyone who should try to find it ere she returned.  She
then ordered the traitor to be hanged, and surrendered the place.  The
treasure was never found, and perhaps later owners have been afraid of
the militant ghost of Lady Bankes.

From time immemorial, tradition had it that a great treasure was buried
near the Kibble in Lancashire.  A saying had been handed down that
anyone standing on the hill at Walton-le-Dale and looking up the valley
toward the site of ancient Richester would gaze over the greatest
treasure that England had ever known.  Digging was undertaken at
intervals during several centuries, until in 1841 laborers accidentally
excavated a mass of silver ornaments, armlets, neck-chains, amulets and
rings, weighing together about a thousand ounces, and more than seven
thousand silver coins, mostly of King Alfred's time, all enclosed in a
leaden case only three feet beneath the surface of the ground.  Many of
these ornaments and coins are to be seen at the British Museum.

On a farm in the Scotch parish of Lesmahagow is a boulder beneath which
is what local tradition calls "a kettle full, a boat full, and a bull's
hide full of gold that is Katie Nevin's hoord."  And for ages past 'tis
well known that a pot of gold has lain at the bottom of a pool at the
tail of a water-fall under Crawfurdland Bridge, three miles from
Kilmarnock.  The last attempt to fish it up was made by one of the
lairds of the place who diverted the stream and emptied the pool, and
the implements of the workmen actually rang against the precious kettle
when a mysterious voice was heard to cry:

"Paw!  Paw!  Crawfurdland's tower's in a law."

The laird and his servants scampered home to find out whether the tower
had been "laid law," but the alarm was only a stratagem of the spirit
that did sentry duty over the treasure.  When the party returned to the
pool, it was filled to the brim and the water was "running o'er the
linn," which was an uncanny thing to see, and the laird would have
nothing more to do with treasure seeking.

The people of Glenary in the Highlands long swore by the legend that
golden treasure was hidden in their valley and that it would not be
found until sought for by the son of a stranger.  At length, while a
newly drained field was being plowed, a large rock was shattered by
blasting, and under it were found many solid gold bracelets of antique
pattern and cunningly ornamented.  The old people knew that the
prophecy had come true, for the youth who held the plow was the son of
an Englishman, a rare being in those parts a few generations ago.

Everyone knows that Ireland is fairly peppered with "crocks o' goold"
which the peasantry would have dug up long before this, but the
treasure is invariably in the keeping of "the little black men" and
they raise the divil and all with the bold intruder, and lucky he is if
he is not snatched away, body, soul, and breeches.  Many a fine lad has
left home just before midnight with a mattock under his arm, and maybe
there was a terrible clap of thunder and that was the last of him
except the empty hole and the mattock beside it which his friends found
next morning.

In France treasure seeking has been at times a popular madness.  The
traditions of the country are singularly alluring, and perhaps the most
romantic of them is that of the "Great Treasure of Gourdon" which is
said to have existed since the reign of Clovis in the sixth century.
The chronicle of all the wealth buried in the cemetery of this convent
at Gourdon in the Department of the Lot has been preserved, including
detailed lists of gold and silver, rubies, emeralds and pearls.  The
convent was sacked and plundered by the Normans, and the treasurer, or
custodian, who had buried all the valuables of the religious houses
under the sway of the same abbot, was murdered while trying to escape
to the feudal seignor of Gourdon with the crosier of the lord abbott.
"The head of the crosier was of solid gold," says an ancient
manuscript, "and the rubies with which it was studded of such wondrous
size that at one single blow the soldier who tore it from the monk's
grasp and used it as a weapon against him, beat in his brains as with a
sledge-hammer."

Not only through the Middle Ages was the search resumed from time to
time, but from the latter days of the reign of Louis XIV until the
Revolution, tradition relates that the cemetery of the convent was
ransacked at frequent intervals.  At length, in 1842, the quest was
abandoned after antiquarians, geologists, and engineers had gravely
agreed that further excavation would be futile.  The French treasure
seekers went elsewhere and then a peasant girl confused the savants by
discovering what was undeniably a part of the lost riches of Gourdon.
She was driving home the cows from a pasture of the abbey lands when a
shower caused her to take shelter in a hollow scooped out of a
sand-bank by laborers mending the road.  Some of the earth caved in
upon her and while she was freeing herself, down rolled a salver, a
paten, and a flagon, all of pure gold, richly chased and studded with
emeralds and rubies.  These articles were taken to Paris and advertised
for sale by auction, the Government bidding them in and placing them in
the museum of the Bibliotheque.

During the reign of Napoleon III there died a very famous treasure
seeker, one Ducasse, who believed that he was about to discover "the
master treasure" (_le maitre tresor_) said to be among the ruins of the
ancient Belgian Abbey of Orval.  Ducasse was a builder by trade and had
gained a large fortune in government contracts every sou of which he
wasted in exploring at Orval.  It was alleged that the treasure had
been buried by the monks and that the word NEMO carved on the tomb of
the last abbott held the key to the location of the hiding-place.

In Mexico one hears similar tales of vast riches buried by religious
orders when menaced by war or expulsion.  One of these is to be found
in the south-western part of the state of Chihuahua where a great gorge
is cut by the Rio Verde.  In this remote valley are the ruins of a
church built by the Jesuits, and when they were about to be driven from
their settlement they sealed up and destroyed all traces of a
fabulously rich mine in which was buried millions of bullion.  Instead
of the more or less stereotyped ghosts familiar as sentinels over
buried treasure, these lost hoards of Mexico are haunted by a specter
even more disquieting than phantom pirates or "little black men."  It
is "The Weeping Woman" who makes strong men cross themselves and shiver
in their serapes, and many have heard or seen her.  A member of a party
seeking buried treasure in the heart of the Sierra Madre mountains
solemnly affirmed as follows:

"We were to measure, at night, a certain distance from a cliff which
was to be found by the relative positions of three tall trees.  It was
on a bleak tableland nine thousand feet above the sea.  The wind
chilled us to the marrow, although we were only a little to the north
of the Tropic of Cancer.  We rode all night and waited for the dawn in
the darkest and coldest hours of those altitudes.  By the light of
pitch pine torches we consulted a map and decided that we had found the
right place.  We rode forward a little and brushed against three soft
warm things.  Turning in our saddles, by the flare of our torches held
high above our heads we beheld three corpses swaying in the wind.  A
wailing cry of a woman's voice came from close at hand, and we fled as
if pursued by a thousand demons.  My comrades assured me that the
Weeping Woman had brushed past us in her eternal flight."

This is a singular narrative but it would not be playing fair to doubt
it.  To be over-critical of buried treasure stories is to clip the
wings of romance and to condemn the spirit of adventure to a pedestrian
gait.  All these tales are true, or men of sane and sober repute would
not go a-treasure hunting by land and sea, and so long as they have a
high-hearted, boyish faith in their mysterious charts and hazy
information, doubters make a poor show of themselves and stand
confessed as thin-blooded dullards who never were young.  Scattered
legends of many climes have been mentioned at random to show that
treasure is everywhere enveloped in a glamour peculiarly its own.  The
base iconoclast may perhaps demolish Santa Claus (which God forbid),
but industrious dreamers will be digging for the gold of Captain Kidd,
long after the last Christmas stocking shall have been pinned above the
fireplace.

There are no conscious liars among the tellers of treasure tales.  The
spell is upon them.  They believe their own yarns, and they prove their
faith by their back-breaking works with pick and shovel.  Here, for
example, is a specimen, chosen at hazard, one from a thousand cut from
the same cloth.  This is no modern Ananias speaking but a gray-bearded,
God-fearing clam-digger of Jewell's Island in Casco Bay on the coast of
Maine.

"I can't remember when the treasure hunters first began coming to this
island, but as long ago as my father's earliest memories they used to
dig for gold up and down the shore.  That was in the days when they
were superstitious enough to spill lamb's blood along the ground where
they dug in order to keep away the devil and his imps.  I can remember
fifty years ago when they brought a girl down here and mesmerized her
to see if she could not lead them to the hidden wealth.

"The biggest mystery, though, of all the queer things that have
happened here in the last hundred years was the arrival of the man from
St. John's when I was a youngster.  He claimed to have the very chart
showing the exact spot where Kidd's gold was buried.  He said he had
got it from an old negro in St. John's who was with Captain Kidd when
he was coasting the islands in this bay.  He showed up here when old
Captain Chase that lived here then was off to sea in his vessel.  So he
waited around a few days till the captain returned, for he wanted to
use a mariner's compass to locate the spot according to the directions
on the chart.

"When Captain Chase came ashore the two went off up the beach together,
and the man from St. John's was never seen again, neither hide nor hair
of him, and it is plumb certain that he wasn't set off in a boat from
Jewell's.

"The folks here found a great hole dug on the southeast shore which
looked as if a large chest had been lifted out of it.  Of course
conclusions were drawn, but nobody got at the truth.  Four years ago
someone found a skeleton in the woods, unburied, simply dropped into a
crevice in the rocks with a few stones thrown over it.  No one knows
whose body it was, although some say,--but never mind about that.  This
old Captain Jonathan Chase was said to have been a pirate, and his
house was full of underground passages and sliding panels and queer
contraptions, such as no honest, law-abiding man could have any use
for."

The worthy Benjamin Franklin was an admirable guide for young men, a
sound philosopher, and a sagacious statesman, but he cannot be credited
with romantic imagination.  He would have been the last person in the
world to lead a buried treasure expedition or to find pleasure in the
company of the most eminent and secretive pirate that ever scuttled a
ship or made mysterious marks upon a well-thumbed chart plentifully
spattered with candle-grease and rum.  He even took pains to discourage
the diverting industry of treasure seeking as it flourished among his
Quaker neighbors and discharged this formidable broadside in the course
of a series of essays known as "The Busy-Body Series":

"... There are among us great numbers of honest artificers and laboring
people, who, fed with a vain hope of suddenly growing rich, neglect
their business, almost to the ruining of themselves and families, and
voluntarily endure abundance of fatigue in a fruitless search after
imaginary hidden treasure.  They wander through the woods and bushes by
day to discover the marks and signs; at midnight they repair to the
hopeful spots with spades and pickaxes; full of expectation, they labor
violently, trembling at the same time in every joint through fear of
certain malicious demons, who are said to haunt and guard such places.

"At length a mighty hole is dug, and perhaps several cart-loads of
earth thrown out; but, alas, no keg or iron pot is found.  No seaman's
chest crammed with Spanish pistoles, or weighty pieces of eight!  They
conclude that, through some mistake in the procedure, some rash word
spoken, or some rule of art neglected, the guardian spirit had power to
sink it deeper into the earth, and convey it out of their reach.  Yet,
when a man is once infatuated, he is so far from being discouraged by
ill success that he is rather animated to double his industry, and will
try again and again in a hundred different places in hopes of meeting
at last with some lucky hit, that shall at once sufficiently reward him
for all his expenses of time and labor.

"This odd humor of digging for money, through a belief that much has
been hidden by pirates formerly frequenting the (Schuylkill) river, has
for several years been mighty prevalent among us; insomuch that you can
hardly walk half a mile out of the town on any side without observing
several pits dug with that design, and perhaps some lately opened.  Men
otherwise of very good sense have been drawn into this practice through
an overweening desire of sudden wealth, and an easy credulity of what
they so earnestly wished might be true.  There seems to be some
peculiar charm in the conceit of finding money and if the sands of
Schuylkill were so much mixed with small grains of gold that a man
might in a day's time with care and application get together to the
value of half a crown, I make no question but we should find several
people employed there that can with ease earn five shillings a day at
their proper trade.

"Many are the idle stories told of the private success of some people,
by which others are encouraged to proceed; and the astrologers, with
whom the country swarms at this time, are either in the belief of these
things themselves, or find their advantage in persuading others to
believe them; for they are often consulted about the critical times for
digging, the methods of laying the spirit, and the like whimseys, which
renders them very necessary to, and very much caressed by these poor,
deluded money hunters.

"There is certainly something very bewitching in the pursuit after
mines of gold and silver and other valuable metals, and many have been
ruined by it....

"Let honest Peter Buckram, who has long without success been a searcher
after hidden money, reflect on this, and be reclaimed from that
unaccountable folly.  Let him consider that every stitch he takes when
he is on his shopboard, is picking up part of a grain of gold that will
in a few days' time amount to a pistole; and let Faber think the same
of every nail he drives, or every stroke with his plane.  Such thoughts
may make them industrious, and, in consequence, in time they may be
wealthy.

"But how absurd it is to neglect a certain profit for such a ridiculous
whimsey; to spend whole days at the 'George' in company with an idle
pretender to astrology, contriving schemes to discover what was never
hidden, and forgetful how carelessly business is managed at home in
their absence; to leave their wives and a warm bed at midnight (no
matter if it rain, hail, snow, or blow a hurricane, provided that be
the critical hour), and fatigue themselves with the violent digging for
what they shall never find, and perhaps getting a cold that may cost
their lives, or at least disordering themselves so as to be fit for no
business beside for some days after.  Surely this is nothing less than
the most egregious folly and madness.

"I shall conclude with the words of the discreet friend Agricola of
Chester County when he gave his son a good plantation.  'My son,' said
he, 'I give thee now a valuable parcel of land; I assure thee I have
found a considerable quantity of gold by digging there; thee mayest do
the same; but thee must carefully observe this, _Never to dig more than
plough-deep_."

For once the illustrious Franklin shot wide of the mark.  These
treasure hunters of Philadelphia, who had seen with their own eyes more
than one notorious pirate, even Blackbeard himself, swagger along Front
Street or come roaring out of the Blue Anchor Tavern by Dock Creek,
were finding their reward in the coin of romance.  Digging mighty holes
for a taskmaster would have been irksome, stupid business indeed, even
for five shillings a day.  They got a fearsome kind of enjoyment in
"trembling violently through fear of certain malicious demons."  And
honest Peter Buckram no doubt discovered that life was more zestful
when he was plying shovel and pickaxe, or whispering with an astrologer
in a corner of the "George" than during the flat hours of toil with
shears and goose.  If the world had charted its course by Poor
Richard's Almanac, there would be a vast deal more thrift and sober
industry than exists, but no room for the spirit of adventure which
reckons not its returns in dollars and cents.

There are many kinds of lost treasure, by sea and by land.  Some of
them, however, lacking the color of romance and the proper backgrounds
of motive and incident, have no stories worth telling.  For instance,
there were almost five thousand wrecks on the Great Lakes during a
period of twenty years, and these lost vessels carried down millions of
treasure or property worth trying to recover.  One steamer had five
hundred thousand dollars' worth of copper in her hold.  Divers and
submarine craft and wrecking companies have made many attempts to
recover these vanished riches, and with considerable success, now and
then fishing up large amounts of gold coin and bullion.  It goes
without saying that the average sixteen-year-old boy could extract not
one solitary thrill from a tale of lost treasure in the Great Lakes,
even though the value might be fairly fabulous.  But let him hear that
a number of Spanish coins have been washed up by the waves on a beach
of Yucatan and the discovery has set the natives to searching for the
buried treasure of Jean Lafitte, the "Pirate of the Gulf," and our
youngster pricks up his ears.

Many noble merchantmen in modern times have foundered or crashed ashore
in various seas with large fortunes in their treasure rooms, and these
are sought by expeditions, but because these ships were not galleons
nor carried a freightage of doubloons and pieces of eight, most of them
must be listed in the catalogue of undistinguished sea tragedies.  The
distinction is really obvious.  The treasure story must have the
picaresque flavor or at least concern itself with bold deeds done by
strong men in days gone by.  Like wine its bouquet is improved by age.

It is the fashion to consider lost treasure as the peculiar property of
pirates and galleons, and yet what has become of the incredibly vast
riches of all the vanished kings, despots, and soldiers who plundered
the races of men from the beginnings of history?  Where is the loot of
ancient Home that was buried with Alaric!  Where is the dazzling
treasure of Samarcand?  Where is the wealth of Antioch, and where the
jewels which Solomon gave the Queen of Sheba?  During thousands of
years of warfare the treasures of the Old World could be saved from the
conqueror only by hiding them underground, and in countless instances
the sword must have slain those who knew the secret.  When Genghis Khan
swept across Russia with his hordes of savage Mongols towns and cities
were blotted out as by fire, and doubtless those of the slaughtered
population who had gold and precious stones buried them and there they
still await the treasure seeker.  What was happening everywhere during
the ruthless ages of conquest and spoliation[2] is indicated by this
bit of narrative told by a native banker of India to W. Forbes
Mitchell, author of "Reminiscences of the Great Mutiny":

"You know how anxious the late Maharajah Scindia was to get back the
fortress of Gwalior, but very few knew the real cause prompting him.
That was a concealed horde of sixty _crores_ (sixty millions sterling)
of rupees in certain vaults within the fortress, over which British
sentinels had been walking for thirty years, never suspecting the
wealth hidden under their feet.  Long before the British Government
restored the fortress to the Maharajah everyone who knew the entrance
to the vaults was dead except one man and he was extremely old.
Although he was in good health he might have died any day.  If this had
happened, the treasure might have been lost to the owner forever and to
the world for ages, because there was only one method of entrance and
it was most cunningly concealed.  On all sides, except for this series
of blind passages, the vaults were surrounded by solid rock.

"The Maharajah was in such a situation that he must either get back his
fortress or divulge the secret of the existence of the treasure to the
British Government, and risk losing it by confiscation.  As soon as
possession of the fortress was restored to him, and even before the
British troops had left Gwalior territory, masons were brought from
Benares, after being sworn to secrecy in the Temple of the Holy Cow.
They were blindfolded and driven to the place where they were to labor.
There they were kept as prisoners until the hidden treasure had been
examined and verified when the hole was again sealed up and the workmen
were once more blindfolded and taken back to Benares in the custody of
an armed escort."



[1] "The Pirates' Own Book" was published at Portland, Maine, 1837, and
largely reprinted from Captain Charles Johnson's "General History of
the Pyrates of the New Providence," etc., first edition, London, 1724.
His second edition of two volumes, published in 1727, contained the
lives of Kidd and Blackbeard.  "The Pirates' Own Book," while largely
indebted to Captain Johnson's work, contains a great deal of material
concerning other noted sea rogues who flourished later than 1727.

[2] "As to Clive, there was no limit to his acquisitions but his own
moderation.  The treasury of Bengal was thrown open to him.  There were
piled up, after the usage of Indian princes, immense masses of coin,
among which might not seldom be detected the florins and byzants with
which, before any European ship had turned the Cape of Good Hope, the
Venetians purchased the stuffs and spices of the East.  Clive walked
between heaps of gold and silver, crowned with rubies and diamonds, and
was at liberty to help himself."--Macauley.




CHAPTER II

CAPTAIN KIDD IN FACT AND FICTION

Doomed to an infamy undeserved, his name reddened with crimes he never
committed, and made wildly romantic by tales of treasure which he did
not bury, Captain William Kidd is fairly entitled to the sympathy of
posterity and the apologies of all the ballad-makers and alleged
historians who have obscured the facts in a cloud of fable.  For two
centuries his grisly phantom has stalked through the legends and
literature of the black flag as the king of pirates and the most
industrious depositor of ill-gotten gold and jewels that ever wielded
pick and shovel.  His reputation is simply prodigious, his name has
frightened children wherever English is spoken, and the Kidd tradition,
or myth, is still potent to send treasure-seekers exploring and
excavating almost every beach, cove, and headland between Nova Scotia
and the Gulf of Mexico.

Fate has played the strangest tricks imaginable with the memory of this
seventeenth century seafarer who never cut a throat or made a victim
walk the plank, who was no more than a third or fourth rate pirate in
an era when this interesting profession was in its heyday, and who was
hanged at Execution Dock for the excessively unromantic crime of
cracking the skull of his gunner with a wooden bucket.

======================================================================

[Illustration: Captain Kidd burying his Bible.]

Carousing at Old Calabar River.  (From _The Pirates' Own Book_.)

======================================================================

As for the riches of Captain Kidd, the original documents in his case,
preserved among the state papers of the Public Record Office in London,
relate with much detail what booty he had and what he did with it.
Alas, they reveal the futility of the searches after the stout
sea-chest buried above high water mark.  The only authentic Kidd
treasure was dug up and inventoried more than two hundred years ago,
nor has the slightest clue to any other been found since then.

These curious documents, faded and sometimes tattered, invite the
reader to thresh out his own conclusions as to how great a scoundrel
Kidd really was, and how far he was a scapegoat who had to be hanged to
clear the fair names of those noble lords in high places who were
partners and promoters of that most unlucky sea venture in which Kidd,
sent out to catch pirates, was said to have turned amateur pirate
himself rather than sail home empty-handed.  Certain it is that these
words of the immortal ballad are cruelly, grotesquely unjust:

  I made a solemn vow, when I sail'd, when I sail'd,
    I made a solemn vow when I sail'd.
  I made a solemn vow, to God I would not bow,
    Nor myself a prayer allow, as I sail'd.

  I'd a Bible in my hand, when I sail'd, when I sail'd,
    I'd a Bible in my hand when I sail'd.
  I'd a Bible in my hand, by my father's great command,
    And I sunk it in the sand when I sail'd.


In English fiction there are three treasure stories of surpassing merit
for ingenious contrivance and convincing illusion.  These are
Stevenson's "Treasure Island"; Poe's "Gold Bug"; and Washington
Irving's "Wolfert Webber."  Differing widely in plot and literary
treatment, each peculiar to the genius of its author, they are blood
kin, sprung from a common ancestor, namely, the Kidd legend.  Why this
half-hearted pirate who was neither red-handed nor of heroic dimensions
even in his badness, should have inspired more romantic fiction than
any other character in American history is past all explaining.

Strangely enough, no more than a generation or two after Kidd's sorry
remnants were swinging in chains for the birds to pick at, there began
to cluster around his memory the folk-lore and superstitions colored by
the supernatural which had been long current in many lands in respect
of buried treasure.  It was a kind of diabolism which still survives in
many a corner of the Atlantic coast where tales of Kidd are told.
Irving took these legends as he heard them from the long-winded
ancients of his own acquaintance and wove them into delightfully
entertaining fiction with a proper seasoning of the ghostly and the
uncanny.  His formidable hero is an old pirate with a sea chest,
aforetime one of Kidd's rogues, who appears at the Dutch tavern near
Corlear's Hook, and there awaits tidings of his shipmates and the
hidden treasure.  It is well known that Stevenson employed a strikingly
similar character and setting to get "Treasure Island" under way in the
opening chapter.  As a literary coincidence, a comparison of these
pieces of fiction is of curious interest.  The similarity is to be
explained on the ground that both authors made use of the same material
whose ground-work was the Kidd legend in its various forms as it has
been commonly circulated.

Stevenson confessed in his preface:

"It is my debt to Washington Irving that exercises my conscience, and
justly so, for I believe plagiarism was rarely carried farther.  I
chanced to pick up the 'Tales of a Traveler' some years ago, with a
view to an anthology of prose narrative, and the book flew up and
struck me: Billy Bones, his chest, the company in the parlor, the whole
inner spirit and a good deal of the material detail of my first
chapters--all were there, all were the property of Washington Irving.
But I had no guess of it then as I sat writing by the fireside, in what
seemed the springtides of a somewhat pedestrian fancy; nor yet day by
day, after lunch, as I read aloud my morning's work to the family.  It
seemed to me original as sin; it seemed to belong to me like my right
eye."

After the opening scenes the two stories veer off on diverging tacks,
the plot of Stevenson moving briskly along to the treasure voyage with
no inclusion of the supernatural features of the Kidd tradition.
Irving, however, narrates at a leisurely pace all the gossip and legend
that were rife concerning Kidd in the Manhattan of the worthy
Knickerbockers.  And he could stock a treasure chest as cleverly as
Stevenson, for when Wolfert Webber dreamed that he had discovered an
immense treasure in the center of his garden, "at every stroke of the
spade he laid bare a golden ingot; diamond crosses sparkled out of the
dust; bags of money turned up their bellies, corpulent with pieces of
eight, or venerable doubloons; and chests, wedged close with moidores,
ducats, and pistareens, yawned before his ravished eyes and vomited
forth their glittering contents."

The warp and woof of "Wolfert Webber" is the still persistent legend
that Kidd buried treasure near the Highlands of the lower Hudson, or
that his ship, the _Quedah Merchant_, was fetched from San Domingo by
his men after he left her and they sailed her into the Hudson and there
scuttled the vessel, scattering ashore and dividing a vast amount of
plunder, some of which was hidden nearby.  Many years ago a pamphlet
was published, purporting to be true, which was entitled, "An Account
of Some of the Traditions and Experiments Respecting Captain Kidd's
Piratical Vessel."  In this it was soberly asserted that Kidd in the
_Quedah Merchant_ was chased into the North River by an English
man-of-war, and finding himself cornered he and his crew took to the
boats with what treasure they could carry, after setting fire to the
ship, and fled up the Hudson, thence footing it through the wilderness
to Boston.

The sunken ship was searched for from time to time, and the explorers
were no doubt assisted by another pamphlet published early in the
nineteenth century which proclaimed itself as:

"A Wonderful Mesmeric Revelation, giving an Account of the Discovery
and Description of a Sunken Vessel, near Caldwell's Landing, supposed
to be that of the Pirate Kidd; including an Account of his Character
and Death, at a distance of nearly three hundred miles from the place."

This psychic information came from a woman by the name of Chester
living in Lynn, Mass., who swore she had never heard of the sunken
treasure ship until while in a trance she beheld its shattered timbers
covered with sand, and "bars of massive gold, heaps of silver coin, and
precious jewels including many large and brilliant diamonds.  The
jewels had been enclosed in shot bags of stout canvas.  There were also
gold watches, like duck's eggs in a pond of water, and the wonderfully
preserved remains of a very beautiful woman, with a necklace of
diamonds around her neck."

As Irving takes pains to indicate, the basis of the legend of the
sunken pirate ship came not from Kidd but from another freebooter who
flourished at the same time.  Says Peechy Prauw, daring to hold
converse with the old buccaneer in the tavern, "Kidd never did bury
money up the Hudson, nor indeed in any of those parts, though many
affirmed such to be the fact.  It was Bradish and others of the
buccaneers who had buried money; some said in Turtle Bay, others on
Long Island, others in the neighborhood of Hell-gate."

This Bradish was caught by Governor Bellomont and sent to England where
he was hanged at Execution Dock.  He had begun his career of crime
afloat as boatswain of a ship called the _Adventure_ (not Kidd's
vessel).  While on a voyage from London to Borneo he helped other
mutineers to take the vessel from her skipper and go a-cruising as
gentlemen of fortune.  They split up forty thousand dollars of specie
found on board, snapped up a few merchantmen to fatten their dividends,
and at length came to the American coast and touched at Long Island.

The _Adventure_ ship was abandoned, and there is reason to think that
she was taken possession of by the crew of the purchased sloop, who
worked her around to New York and beached and sunk her after stripping
her of fittings and gear.  Bradish and his crew also cruised along the
Sound for some time in their small craft, landing and buying supplies
at several places, until nineteen of them were caught and taken to
Boston.  That there should have been some confusion of facts relating
to Kidd and Bradish is not at all improbable.

Among the Dutch of New Amsterdam was to be found that world-wide
superstition of the ghostly guardians of buried treasure, and Irving
interpolates the distressful experience of Cobus Quackenbos "who dug
for a whole night and met with incredible difficulty, for as fast as he
threw one shovelful of earth out of the hole, two were thrown in by
invisible hands.  He succeeded so far, however, as to uncover an iron
chest, when there was a terrible roaring, ramping, and raging of
uncouth figures about the hole, and at length a shower of blows, dealt
by invisible cudgels, fairly belabored him off of the forbidden ground.
This Cobus Quackenbos had declared on his death bed, so that there
could not be any doubt of it.  He was a man that had devoted many years
of his life to money-digging, and it was thought would have ultimately
succeeded, had he not died recently of a brain fever in the almshouse."

A story built around the Kidd tradition but of a wholly different kind
is that masterpiece of curious deductive analysis, "The Gold Bug," with
its cryptogram and elaborate mystification.  In making use of an
historical character to serve the ends of fiction it is customary to
make him move among the episodes of the story with some regard for the
probabilities.  For example, it would hardly do to have Napoleon win
the Battle of Waterloo as the hero of a novel.  What really happened
and what the author imagines might have happened must be dovetailed
with an eye to avoid contradicting the known facts.  Like almost
everyone else, however, Poe took the most reckless liberties with the
career of poor Captain Kidd and his buried treasure and cared not a rap
for historical evidence to the contrary.  Although Stevenson is ready
to admit that his "skeleton is conveyed from Poe," the author of
"Treasure Island" is not wholly fair to himself.  The tradition that
secretive pirates were wont to knock a shipmate or two on the head as a
feature of the program of burying treasure is as old as the hills.  The
purpose was either to get rid of the witnesses who had helped dig the
hole, or to cause the spot to be properly haunted by ghosts as an
additional precaution against the discovery of the hoard.

What Stevenson "conveyed" from Poe was the employment of a skeleton to
indicate the bearings and location of the treasure, although, to be
accurate, it was a skull that figured in "The Gold Bug."  Otherwise, in
the discovery of the remains of slain pirates, both were using a stock
incident of buried treasure lore most generally fastened upon the
unfortunate Captain Kidd.

Most of the treasure legends of the Atlantic coast are fable and
moonshine, with no more foundation than what somebody heard from his
grandfather who may have dreamed that Captain Kidd or Blackbeard once
landed in a nearby cove.  The treasure seeker needs no evidence,
however, and with him "faith is the substance of things hoped for."
There is a marsh of the Penobscot river, a few miles inland from the
bay of that name, which has been indefatigably explored for more than a
century.  A native of a statistical turn of mind not long ago expressed
himself in this common-sense manner:

"Thousands of tons of soil have been shovelled over time and again.  I
figure that these treasure hunters have handled enough earth in turning
up Codlead Marsh to build embankments and fill cuts for a railroad
grade twenty miles long.  In other words, if these lunatics that have
tried to find Kidd's money had hired out with railroad contractors,
they could have earned thirty thousand dollars at regular day wages
instead of the few battered old coins discovered in 1798 which started
all this terrible waste of energy."

The most convincing evidence of the existence of a pirates' rendezvous
and hoard has been found on Oak Island, Nova Scotia.  In fact, this is
the true treasure story, _par excellence_, of the whole Atlantic coast,
with sufficient mystery to give it precisely the proper flavor.  Local
tradition has long credited Captain Kidd with having been responsible
for the indubitable remains of piratical activity, but it has been
proved that Kidd went nowhere near Nova Scotia after he came sailing
home from the East Indies, and the industrious visitors to Oak Island
are therefore unknown to history.

The island has a sheltered haven called Mahone Bay, snugly secluded
from the Atlantic, with deep water, and a century ago the region was
wild and unsettled.  Near the head of the bay is a small cove which was
visited in the year of 1795 by three young men named Smith, MacGinnis,
and Vaughan who drew their canoes ashore and explored at random the
noble groves of oaks.  Soon they came to a spot whose peculiar
appearance aroused their curiosity.  The ground had been cleared many
years before; this was indicated by the second growth of trees and the
kind of vegetation which is foreign to the primeval condition of the
soil.  In the center of the little clearing was a huge oak whose bark
was gashed with markings made by an axe.  One of the stout lower
branches had been sawn off at some distance from the trunk and to this
natural derrick-arm had been attached a heavy block and tackle as shown
by the furrowed scar in the bark.  Directly beneath this was a
perceptible circular depression of the turf, perhaps a dozen feet in
diameter.

The three young men were curious, and made further investigation.  The
tide chanced to be uncommonly low, and while ranging along the beach of
the cove they discovered a huge iron ring-bolt fastened to a rock which
was invisible at ordinary low water.  They reasonably surmised that
this had been a mooring place in days gone by.  Not far distant a
boatswain's whistle of an ancient pattern and a copper coin bearing the
date of 1713 were picked up.

The trio scented pirates' treasure and shortly returned to the cove to
dig in the clearing hard by the great oak.  It was soon found that they
were excavating in a clearly defined shaft, the walls of which were of
the solid, undisturbed earth in which the cleavage of other picks and
shovels could be distinguished.  The soil within the shaft was much
looser and easily removed.  Ten feet below the surface they came to a
covering of heavy oak plank which was ripped out with much difficulty.

At a depth of twenty feet another layer of planking was uncovered, and
digging ten feet deeper, a third horizontal bulkhead of timber was laid
bare.  The excavation was now thirty feet down, and the three men had
done all they could without a larger force, hoisting machinery, and
other equipment.  The natives of Mahone Bay, however, were singularly
reluctant to aid the enterprise.  Hair-raising stories were afloat of
ghostly guardians, of strange cries, of unearthly fires that flickered
along the cove, and all that sort of thing.  Superstition effectually
fortified the place, and those bold spirits, Smith, MacGinnis, and
Vaughan were forced to abandon their task for lack of reinforcements.

Half a dozen years later a young physician of Truro, Dr. Lynds, visited
Oak Island, having got wind of the treasure story, and talked with the
three men aforesaid.  He took their report seriously, made an
investigation of his own, and straightway organized a company backed by
considerable capital.  Prominent persons of Truro and the neighborhood
were among the investors, including Colonel Robert Archibald, Captain
David Archibald, and Sheriff Harris.  A gang of laborers was mustered
at the cove, and the dirt began to fly.  The shaft was opened to a
depth of ninety-five feet, and, as before, some kind of covering, or
significant traces thereof, was disclosed every ten feet or so.  One
layer was of charcoal spread over a matting of a substance resembling
cocoa fibre, while another was of putty, some of which was used in
glazing the windows of a house then building on the nearby coast.

Ninety feet below the surface, the laborers found a large flat stone or
quarried slab, three feet long and sixteen inches wide, upon which was
chiselled the traces of an inscription.  This stone was used in the
jamb of a fireplace of a new house belonging to Smith, and was later
taken to Halifax in the hope of having the mysterious inscription
deciphered.  One wise man declared that the letters read, "Ten feet
below two million pounds lie buried," but this verdict was mostly
guess-work.  The stone is still in Halifax, where it was used for
beating leather in a book-binder's shop until the inscription had been
worn away.

When the workmen were down ninety-five feet, they came to a wooden
platform covering the shaft.  Until then the hole had been clear of
water, but overnight it filled within twenty-five feet of the top.
Persistent efforts were made to bail out the flood but with such poor
success that the shaft was abandoned and another sunk nearby, the plan
being to tunnel into the first pit and thereby drain it and get at the
treasure.  The second shaft was driven to a depth of a hundred and ten
feet, but while the tunnel was in progress the water broke through and
made the laborers flee for their lives.  The company had spent all its
money, and the results were so discouraging that the work was abandoned.

It was not until 1849 that another attempt was made to fathom the
meaning of the extraordinary mystery of Oak Island.  Dr. Lynds and
Vaughan were still alive and their narratives inspired the organization
of another treasure-seeking company.  Vaughan easily found the old
"Money Pit" as it was called, and the original shaft was opened and
cleared to a depth of eighty-six feet when an inrush of water stopped
the undertaking.  Again the work ceased for lack of adequate pumping
machinery, and it was decided to use a boring apparatus such as was
employed in prospecting for coal.  A platform was rigged in the old
shaft, and the large auger bit its way in a manner described by the
manager of the enterprise as follows:

"The platform was struck at ninety-eight feet, just as the old diggers
found it.  After going through this platform, which was five inches
thick and proved to be of spruce, the auger dropped twelve inches and
then went through four inches of oak; then it went through twenty-two
inches of metal in pieces, but the auger failed to take any of it
except three links resembling an ancient watch-chain.  It then went
through eight inches of oak, which was thought to be the bottom of the
first box and the top of the next; then through twenty-two inches of
metal the same as before; then four inches of oak and six inches of
spruce, then into clay seven feet without striking anything.  In the
next boring, the platform was struck as before at ninety-eight feet;
passing through this, the auger fell about eighteen inches, and came in
contact with, as supposed, the side of a cask.  The flat chisel
revolving close to the side of the cask gave it a jerk and irregular
motion.  On withdrawing the auger several splinters of oak, such as
might come from the side of an oak stave, and a small quantity of a
brown fibrous substance resembling the husk of a cocoa-nut, were
brought up.  The distance between the upper and lower platforms was
found to be six feet."

In the summer of 1850 a third shaft was sunk just to the west of the
Money Pit, but this also filled with water which was discovered to be
salt and effected by the rise and fall of the tide in the cove.  It was
reasoned that if a natural inlet existed, those who had buried the
treasure must have encountered the inflow which would have made their
undertaking impossible.  Therefore the pirates must have driven some
kind of a tunnel or passage from the cove with the object of flooding
out any subsequent intruders.  Search was made along the beach, and
near where the ring-bolt was fastened in the rock a bed of the brown,
fibrous material was uncovered and beneath it a mass of small rock
unlike the surrounding sand and gravel.

It was decided to build a coffer-dam around this place which appeared
to be a concealed entrance to a tunnel connecting the cove with the
Money Pit.  In removing the rock, a series of well-constructed drains
was found, extending from a common center, and fashioned of carefully
laid stone.  Before the coffer-dam was finished, it was overflowed by a
very high tide and collapsed under pressure.  The explorers did not
rebuild it but set to work sinking a shaft which was intended to cut
into this tunnel and dam the inlet from the cove.  One failure,
however, followed on the heels of another, and shaft after shaft was
dug only to be caved in or filled by salt water.  In one of these was
found an oak plank, several pieces of timber bearing the marks of
tools, and many hewn chips.  A powerful pumping engine was installed,
timber cribbing put into the bottom of the shafts, and a vast amount of
clay dumped on the beach in an effort to block up the inlet of the
sea-water tunnel.  Baffled in spite of all this exertion, the
treasure-seekers spent their money and had to quit empty-handed.

Forty years passed, and the crumbling earth almost filled the numerous
and costly excavations and the grass grew green under the sentinel
oaks.  Then, in 1896, the cove was once more astir with boats and the
shore populous with toilers.  The old records had been overhauled and
their evidence was so alluring that fresh capital was subscribed and
many shares eagerly snapped up in Truro, Halifax and elsewhere.  The
promoters became convinced that former attempts had failed because of
crude appliances and insufficient engineering skill, and this time the
treasure was sought in up-to-date fashion.

Almost twenty deep shafts were dug, one after the other, in a ring
about the Money Pit, and tunnels driven in a net-work.  It was the
purpose of the engineers to intercept the underground channel and also
to drain the pirates' excavation.  Hundreds of pounds of dynamite were
used and thousands of feet of heavy timber.  Further traces of the work
of the ancient contrivers of this elaborate hiding-place were
discovered, but the funds of the company were exhausted before the
secret of the Money Pit could be revealed.

Considerable boring was done under the direction of the manager,
Captain Welling.  The results confirmed the previous disclosures
achieved by the auger.  At a depth of one hundred and twenty-six feet,
Captain Welling's crew drilled through oak wood, and struck a piece of
iron past which they could not drive the encasing pipe.  A smaller
auger was then used and at one hundred and fifty-three feet cement was
found of a thickness of seven inches, covering another layer of oak.
Beyond was some soft metal, and the drill brought to the surface a
small fragment of sheepskin parchment upon which was written in ink the
syllable, "vi" or "wi."  Other curious samples, wood and iron, were
fished up, but the "soft metal," presumed to be gold or silver, refused
to cling to the auger.  It was of course taken for granted that the
various layers of oak planking and spruce were chests containing the
treasure.

During the various borings, seven different chests or casks, or
whatever they may be, have been encountered.  It seems incredible that
any pirates or buccaneers known to the American coast should have been
at such prodigious pains to conceal their plunder as to dig a hole a
good deal more than a hundred feet deep, connect it with the sea by an
underground passage, and safeguard it by many layers of timber, cement,
and other material.  Possibly some of the famous freebooters of the
Spanish Main in Henry Morgan's time might have achieved such a task,
but Nova Scotia was a coast unknown to them and thousands of miles from
their track.  Poor Kidd had neither the men, the treasure, nor the
opportunity to make such a memorial of his career as this.

Quite recently a new company was formed to grapple with the secret of
Oak Island which has already swallowed at least a hundred thousand
dollars in labor and machinery.  For more than a century, sane,
hard-headed Nova Scotians have tried to reach the bottom of the "Money
Pit," and as an attractive speculation it has no rival in the field of
treasure-seeking.  There may be documents somewhere in existence, a
chart or memorandum mouldering in a sea chest in some attic or cellar
of France, England, or Spain, that will furnish the key to this rarely
picturesque and tantalizing puzzle.  The unbeliever has only to go to
Nova Scotia in the summer time and seek out Oak Island, which is
reached by way of the town of Chester, to find the deeply pitted area
of the treasure hunt, and very probably engines and workmen busy at the
fine old game of digging for pirates' gold.

Let us now give the real Captain Kidd his due, painting him no blacker
than the facts warrant, and at the same time uncover the true story of
his treasure, which is the plum in the pudding.  He had been a merchant
shipmaster of brave and honorable repute in an age when every
deep-water voyage was a hazard of privateers and freebooters of all
flags, or none at all.  In one stout square-rigger after another, well
armed and heavily manned, he had sailed out of the port of New York, in
which he dwelt as early as 1689.  He had a comfortable, even prosperous
home in Liberty Street, was married to a widow of good family, and was
highly thought of by the Dutch and English merchants of the town.  A
shrewd trader who made money for his owners, he was also a fighting
seaman of such proven mettle that he was given command of privateers
which cruised along the coasts of the Colonies and harried the French
in the West Indies.  His excellent reputation and character are
attested by official documents.  In the records of the Proceedings of
the Provincial Assembly of New York is the following entry under date
of April 18, 1691:

"Gabriel Monville, Esq. and Thomas Willet, Esq. are appointed to attend
the House of Representatives and acquaint them of the many good
services done to this Province by Captain William Kidd in his attending
here with his Vessels before His Excellency's[1] arrival, and that it
would be acceptable to His Excellency and this Board that they consider
of some suitable reward to him for his good services."

This indicates that Captain Kidd had been in command of a small
squadron engaged in protecting the commerce of the colony.  On May 14,
the following was adopted by the House of Representatives:

"Ordered, that His Excellency be addressed unto, to order the Receiver
General to pay to Captain William Kidd, One Hundred and Fifty Pounds
current money of this Province, as a suitable reward for the many good
services done to this Province."

In June, only a month after this, Captain Kidd was asked by the Colony
of Massachusetts to punish the pirates who were pestering the shipping
of Boston and Salem.  The negotiations were conducted in this wise:


_By the Governor and Council._

Proposals offered to Captain Kidd and Captain Walkington to encourage
their going forth in their Majesties' Service to suppress an Enemy
Privateer now upon this Coast.

That they have liberty to beat up drums for forty men apiece to go
forth on this present Expedition, not taking any Children or Servants
without their Parents' or Masters' Consent.  A list of the names of
such as go in the said Vessels to be presented to the Governor before
their departure.

That they cruise upon the Coast for the space of ten or fifteen days in
search of the said Privateer, and then come in again and land the men
supplied them from hence.

That what Provisions shall be expended within the said time, for so
many men as are in both the said Vessels, be made good to them on their
return, in case they take no purchase;[2] but if they shall take the
Privateer, or any other Vessels, then only a proportion of Provisions
for so many men as they take in here.

If any of our men happen to be wounded in the engagement with the
Privateer, that they be cured at the public charge.

That the men supplied from hence be proportionable sharers with the
other men belonging to said Vessels, of all purchase that shall be
taken.

Besides the promise of a Gratuity to the Captains, Twenty Pounds apiece
in money.

Boston, June 8th, 1691.


To this thrifty set of terms, Captain Kidd made reply:

"_Imprimis_, To have forty men, with their arms, provisions, and
ammunition.

"_2dly_.  All the men that shall be wounded, which have been put in by
the Country, shall be put on shore, and the Country to take care of
them.  And if so fortunate as to take the Pirate and her prizes, then
to bring them to Boston.

"_3rdly_.  For myself, to have One Hundred Pounds in money; Thirty
Pounds thereof to be paid down, the rest upon my return to Boston; and
if we bring in said Ship and her Prizes, then the same to be divided
amongst our men.

"_4thly_.  The Provisions put on board must be ten barrels Pork and
Beef, ten barrels of Flour, two hogsheads of Peas, and one barrel of
Gunpowder for the great guns.

"_5thly_.  That I will cruise on the coast for ten days' time; and if
so that he is gone off the coast, that I cannot hear of him, I will
then, at my return, take care and set what men on shore that I have
had, and are willing to leave me or the Ship."

These records serve to show in what esteem Captain Kidd was held by the
highest officials of the Colonies.  Such men as he were sailing out of
Boston, New York, and Salem to trade in uncharted seas on remote coasts
and fight their way home again with rich cargoes.  They hammered out
the beginnings of a mighty commerce for the New World and created, by
the stern stress of circumstances, as fine a race of seamen as ever
filled cabin and forecastle.

======================================================================

[Illustration: The Idle Apprentice goes to sea.  (From Hogarth's
series, "Industry and Idleness.")]

On the shore of this reach of the Thames, at Tilbury, is shown a
gibbeted pirate hanging in chains, just as it befell Captain William
Kidd.

======================================================================

In the year 1695, Captain Kidd chanced to be anchored in London port in
his brigantine _Antigoa_, busy with loading merchandise and shipping a
crew for the return voyage across the Atlantic.  Now, Richard Coote,
Earl of Bellomont, an ambitious and energetic Irishman, had just then
been appointed royal governor of the Colonies of New York and
Massachusetts, and he was particularly bent on suppressing the swarm of
pirates who infested the American coast and waxed rich on the English
commerce of the Indian Ocean.  Their booty was carried to Rhode Island,
New York, and Boston, even from far-away Madagascar, and many a
colonial merchant, outwardly the pattern of respectability, was
secretly trafficking in this plunder.

"I send you, my Lord, to New York," said King William III to Bellomont,
"because an honest and intrepid man is wanted to put these abuses down,
and because I believe you to be such a man."

Thereupon Bellomont asked for a frigate to send in chase of the bold
sea rogues, but the king referred him to the Lords of the Admiralty who
discovered sundry obstacles bound in red tape, the fact being that
official England was at all times singularly indifferent, or covertly
hostile, toward the maritime commerce of her American colonies.  Being
denied a man-of-war, Bellomont conceived the plan of privately
equipping an armed ship as a syndicate enterprise without cost to the
government.  The promoters were to divide the swag captured from
pirates as dividends on their investment.

The enterprise was an alluring one, and six thousand pounds sterling
were subscribed by Bellomont and his friends, including such
illustrious personages as Somers, the Lord Chancellor and leader of the
Whig party; the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Earl of Orford, First Lord of
the Admiralty; the Earl of Romney, and Sir Richard Harrison, a wealthy
merchant.  According to Bishop Burnet, it was the king who "proposed
managing it by a private enterprise, and said he would lay down three
thousand pounds himself, and recommended it to his Ministers to find
out the refit.  In compliance with this, the Lord Somers, the Earl of
Orford, Romney, Bellomont and others, contributed the whole expense,
for the King excused himself by reason of other accidents, and did not
advance the sum he had promised."

Macauley, discussing in his "History of England" the famous scandal
which later involved these partners of Kidd, defends them in this
spirited fashion:

"The worst that could be imputed even to Bellomont, who had drawn in
all the rest, was that he had been led into a fault by his ardent zeal
for the public service, and by the generosity of a nature as little
prone to suspect as to devise villainies.  His friends in England might
surely be pardoned for giving credit to his recommendations.  It is
highly probable that the motive which induced some of them to aid his
designs was a genuine public spirit.  But if we suppose them to have
had a view to gain, it would be legitimate gain.  Their conduct was the
very opposite of corrupt.  Not only had they taken no money.  They had
disbursed money largely, and had disbursed it with the certainty that
they should never be reimbursed unless the outlay proved beneficial to
the public."

It would be easy to pick flaws in this argument.  Bellomont's partners,
no matter how public spirited, hoped to reimburse themselves, and
something over, as receivers of stolen goods.  It was a dashing
speculation, characteristic of its century, and neither better nor
worse than the privateering of that time.  What raised the subsequent
row in Parliament and made of Kidd a political issue and a party
scapegoat, was the fact that his commission was given under the Great
Seal of England, thus stamping a private business with the public
sanction of His Majesty's Government.  For this Somers, as Lord
Chancellor, was responsible, and it later became a difficult
transaction for his partisans to defend.

There was in London, at that time, one Robert Livingston, founder of a
family long notable in the Colony and State of New York, a man of large
property and solid station.  He was asked to recommend a shipmaster
fitted for the task in hand and named Captain Kidd, who was reluctant
to accept.  His circumstances were prosperous, he had a home and family
in New York, and he was by no means anxious to go roving after pirates
who were pretty certain to fight for their necks.  His consent was won
by the promise of a share of the profits (Kidd was a canny Scot by
birth) and by the offer of Livingston to be his security and his
partner in the venture.

An elaborate contract was drawn up with the title of "Articles of
Agreement made this Tenth day of October in the year of Our Lord, 1695,
between the Right Honorable Richard, Earl of Bellomont, of the one
part, and Robert Livingston Esq., and Captain William Kidd of the other
part."

In the first article, "the said Earl of Bellomont doth covenant and
agree at his proper charge to procure from the King's Majesty or from
the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, as the case may require, one
or more Commissions impowering him, the said Captain Kidd, to act
against the King's enemies, and to take prizes from them as a private
man-of-war, in the usual manner, and also to fight with, conquer and
subdue pyrates, and to take them and their goods, _with such large and
beneficial powers and clauses in such commissions as may be most proper
and effectual in such cases_."

Bellomont agreed to pay four-fifths of the cost of the ship, with its
furnishings and provisions, Kidd and Livingston to contribute the
remainder, "in pursuance of which Bellomont was to pay down 1600 pounds
on or before the 6th of November, in order to the speedy buying of said
ship." The Earl agreed to pay such further sums as should "complete and
make up the said four parts of five of the charge of the said ship's
apparel, furniture, and victualling, within seven weeks after date of
the agreement," and Kidd and Livingston bound themselves to do likewise
in respect of their fifth part of the expense.  Other articles of the
agreement read:

"7.  The said Captain Kidd doth covenant and agree to procure and take
with him on board of the said ship, one hundred mariners, or seamen, or
thereabout, and to make what reasonable and convenient speed he can to
set out to sea with the said ship, and to sail to such parts and places
where he may meet with the said Pyrates, and to use his utmost endeavor
to meet with, subdue, and conquer the said Pyrates, and to take from
them their goods, merchandise, and treasures; also to take what prizes
he can from the King's enemies, and forthwith to make the best of his
way to Boston in New England, and that without touching at any other
port or harbor whatsoever, or without breaking bulk, or diminishing any
part of what he shall so take or obtain; (of which he shall make oath
in case the same is desired by the said Earl of Bellomont), and there
to deliver the same into the hands or possession of the said Earl.

"8.  The said Captain Kidd doth agree that the contract and bargain
which he will make with the said ship's crew shall be no purchase,[3]
no pay, and not otherwise; and that the share and proportion which his
said crew shall, by such contract, have of such prizes, goods,
merchandise and treasure, as he shall take as prize, or from any
Pyrates, shall not at the most exceed a fourth part of the same, and
shall be less than a fourth part, in case the same may reasonably and
conveniently be agreed upon.

"9.  Robert Livingston Esq. and Captain William Kidd agree that if they
catch no Pyrates, they will refund to the said Earl of Bellomont all
the money advanced by him on or before March 25th, 1697, and they will
keep the said ship."

Article 10 allotted the captured goods and treasures, after deducting
no more than one-fourth for the crew.  The remainder was to be divided
into five equal parts, of which Bellomont was to receive four parts,
leaving a fifth to be shared between Kidd and Livingston.  The stake of
Captain Kidd was therefore to be three one-fortieths of the whole, or
seven and one-half per cent. of the booty.

It is apparent from these singular articles of agreement that Robert
Livingston, in the role of Kidd's financial backer, was willing to run
boldly speculative chances of success, and was also confident that a
rich crop of "pyrates" could be caught for the seeking.  If Kidd should
sail home empty-handed, then these two partners stood to lose a large
amount, by virtue of the contract which provided that Bellomont and his
partners must be reimbursed for their outlay, less the value of the
ship itself.  Livingston also gave bonds in the sum of ten thousand
pounds that Kidd would be faithful to his trust and obedient to his
orders, which in itself is sufficient to show that this shipmaster was
a man of the best intentions, and of thoroughly proven worth.

Captain Kidd's privateering commission was issued by the High Court of
Admiralty on December 11, 1695, and licensed and authorized him to "set
forth in war-like manner in the said ship called the _Adventure
Galley_, under his own command, and therewith, by force of arms, to
apprehend, seize, and take the ships, vessels, and goods belonging to
the French King and his subjects, or inhabitants within the dominion of
the said French King, and such other ships, vessels, and goods as are
or shall be liable to confiscation," etc.

This document was of the usual tenor, but in addition, Captain Kidd was
granted a special royal commission, under the Great Seal, which is
given herewith because it so intimately concerned the later fortunes of
his noble partners:


WILLIAM REX.

WILLIAM THE THIRD, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.  To our trusty and
well beloved Captain William Kidd, Commander of the ship _Adventure
Galley_, or to any other, the commander of the same for the time being,
GREETING:

Whereas, we are informed that Captain Thomas Tew, John Ireland, Capt.
Thomas Wake, and Capt. William Maze, and other subjects, natives, or
inhabitants of New York and elsewhere, in our plantations in America,
have associated themselves with divers other wicked and ill-disposed
persons, and do, against the law of nations, commit many and great
piracies, robberies, and depredations on the seas upon the parts of
America and in other parts, to the great hindrance and discouragement
of trade and navigation, and to the great danger and hurt of our loving
subjects, our allies, and of all others navigating the seas upon their
lawful occasions,

NOW, KNOW YE, that we being desirous to prevent the aforesaid mischief,
and as much as in us lies, to bring the said pirates, freebooters, and
sea rovers to justice, have thought fit, and do hereby give and grant
to the said Robert Kidd (to whom our Commissioners for exercising the
office of Lord High Admiral of England have granted a commission as a
private man-of-war, bearing date of the 11th day of December, 1695),
and unto the Commander of the said ship for the time being, and unto
the Officers, Mariners, and others which shall be under your command,
full power and authority to apprehend, seize, and take into your
custody, as well the said Captain Tew, John Ireland, Capt. Thomas Wake,
and Capt. William Maze, or Mace, and all such pirates, freebooters, and
sea rovers, being either our subjects or of other nations associated
with them, which you shall meet with upon the seas or coasts of
America, or upon any other seas or coasts, with all their ships and
vessels, and all such merchandizes, money, goods, and wares as shall be
found on board, or with them, in case they shall willingly yield
themselves up, but if they will not yield without fighting, then you
are by force to compel to yield.

And we also require you to bring, or cause to be brought, such pirates,
freebooters, or sea rovers as you shall seize, to a legal trial to the
end that they may be proceeded against according to the law in such
cases.  And we do hereby command all our Officers, Ministers, and
others our loving subjects whatsoever to be aiding and assisting you in
the premises, and we do hereby enjoin you to keep an exact journal of
your proceedings in execution of the premises, and set down the names
of such pirates and of their officers and company, and the names of
such ships and vessels as you shall by virtue of these presents take
and seize, and the quantity of arms, ammunition, provisions, and lading
of such ships, and the true value of the same, as near as you judge.

And we do hereby strictly charge and command, and you will answer the
contrary to your peril, that you do not, in any manner, offend or
molest our friends and allies, their ships or subjects, by colour or
pretense of these presents, or the authority thereof granted.  _In
witness_ whereof, we have caused our Great Seal of England to be
affixed to these presents.  Given at our Court in Kensington, the 26th
day of January, 1696, in the seventh Year of our Reign.


It was privately understood that the King was to receive one-tenth of
the proceeds of the voyage, although this stipulation does not appear
in the articles of agreement.  By a subsequent grant from the Crown,
this understanding was publicly ratified and all money and property
taken from pirates, except the King's tenth, was to be made over to the
owners of the _Adventure Galley_, to wit, Bellomont and his partners,
and Kidd and Livingston, as they had agreed among themselves.

The _Adventure Galley_, the ship selected for the cruise, was of 287
tons and thirty-four guns, a powerful privateer for her day, which Kidd
fitted out at Plymouth, England.  Finding difficulty in recruiting a
full crew of mettlesome lads, he sailed from that port for New York in
April of 1696, with only seventy hands.  While anchored in the Hudson,
he increased his company to 155 men, many of them the riff-raff of the
water-front, deserters, wastrels, brawlers, and broken seamen who may
have sailed under the black flag aforetime.  It was a desperate
venture, the pay was to be in shares of the booty taken, "no prizes, no
money," and sober, respectable sailors looked askance at it.  Kidd was
impatient to make an offing.  Livingston and Bellomont were chafing at
the delay, and he had to ship what men he could find at short notice.

The _Adventure Galley_ cruised first among the West Indies, honestly in
quest of "pirates, freebooters and sea rovers," and not falling in with
any of these gentry, Kidd took his departure for the Cape of Good Hope
and the Indian Ocean.  This was in accordance with his instructions,
for in the preamble of the articles of agreement it was stated that
"certain persons did some time since depart from New England, Rhode
Island, New York, and other parts in America and elsewhere with an
intention to pyrate and to commit spoyles and depredations in the Red
Sea and elsewhere, and to return with such riches and goods as they
should get to certain places by them agreed upon, of which said persons
and places the said Captain Kidd hath notice."

This long voyage was soundly planned.  Madagascar was the most
notorious haunt of pirates in the world.  Their palm-thatched villages
fringed its beaches and the blue harbors sheltered many sail which
sallied forth to play havoc with the precious argosies of the English,
French, and Dutch East India Companies.  Kidd hoped to win both favor
and fortune by ridding these populous trade routes of the perils that
menaced every honest skipper.

When, at length, Madagascar was sighted, the _Adventure Galley_ was
nine months from home, and not a prize had been taken.  Kidd was short
of provisions and of money with which to purchase supplies.  His crew
was in a grumbling, mutinous temper, as they rammed their tarry fists
into their empty pockets and stared into the empty hold.  The captain
quieted them with promises of dazzling spoil, and the _Adventure
Galley_ vainly skirted the coast, only to find that some of the pirates
had got wind of her coming while others were gone a-cruising.  From the
crew of a wrecked French ship, Kidd took enough gold to buy provisions
in a Malabar port.  This deed was hardly generous, but by virtue of his
letters of marque Kidd was authorized to despoil a Frenchman wherever
he caught him.

After more futile cruising to and fro, Kidd fell from grace and crossed
the very tenuous line that divided privateering from piracy in his
century.  His first unlawful capture was a small native vessel owned by
Aden merchants and commanded by one Parker, an Englishman, the mate
being a Portuguese.  The plunder was no more than a bale or two of
pepper and coffee, and a few gold pieces.  It was petty larceny
committed to quiet a turbulent crew and to pay operating expenses.
Parker made loud outcry ashore and a little later Kidd was overtaken by
a vengeful Portuguese man-of-war off the port of Carawar.  The two
ships hammered each other with broad-sides and bow-chasers six hours on
end, when Kidd went his way with several men wounded.

Sundry other small craft were made to stand and deliver after this
without harm to their crews, but no treasure was lifted until Kidd
ventured to molest the shipping of the Great Mogul.  That fabled
potentate of Asia whose empire had been found by Genghis Khan and
extended by Tamerlane, and whose gorgeous palaces were at Samarcand,
had a mighty commerce between the Red Sea and China, and his rich
freights also swelled the business of the English East India Company.
His ships were often convoyed by the English and the Dutch.  It was
from two of these vessels that Kidd took his treasure and thus achieved
the brief career which rove the halter around his neck.

The first of these ships of the Great Mogul he looted and burned, and
to the second, the _Quedah Merchant_, he transferred his flag after
forsaking the leaky, unseaworthy _Adventure Galley_ on the Madagascar
coast.  Out of this capture he took almost a half million dollars'
worth of gold, jewels, plate, silks, and other precious merchandise of
which his crew ran away with by far the greater share, leaving Kidd
with about one hundred thousand dollars in booty.

It was charged that while on this coast Kidd amicably consorted with a
very notorious pirate named Culliford, instead of blowing him out of
the water as he properly deserved.  This was the most damning feature
of his indictment, and there is no doubt that he sold Culliford cannon
and munitions and received him in his cabin.  On the other hand, Kidd
declared that he would have attacked the pirate but he was overpowered
by his mutinous crew who caroused with Culliford's rogues and were
wholly out of hand.  And Kidd's story is lent the color of truth by the
fact that ninety-five of his men deserted to join the _Mocha Frigate_
of Culliford and sail with him under the Jolly Roger.  It is fair to
assume that if William Kidd had been the successful pirate he is
portrayed, his own rascals would have stayed with him in the _Quedah
Merchant_ which was a large and splendidly armed and equipped ship of
between four and five hundred tons.

Abandoned by two-thirds of his crew, and unable to find trustworthy men
to fill their places, Kidd was in sore straits and decided to sail for
home and square accounts with Bellomont, trusting to his powerful
friends to keep him out of trouble.  In the meantime, the Great Mogul
and the English East India Company had made vigorous complaint and Kidd
was proclaimed a pirate.  The royal pardon was offered all pirates that
should repent of their sins, barring Kidd who was particularly excepted
by name.  Many a villain whose hands were red with the slaughter of
ships' crews was thus officially forgiven, while Kidd who had killed no
man barring that mutineer, the gunner, William Moore, was hunted in
every sea, with a price on his head.

On April 1, 1699, after an absence of almost two years, Kidd arrived at
Anguilla,[4] his first port of call in the West Indies, and went ashore
to buy provisions.  There he learned, to his consternation, that he had
been officially declared a pirate and stood in peril of his life.  The
people refused to have any dealings with him, and he sailed to St.
Thomas, and thence to Curacoa where he was able to get supplies through
the friendship of an English merchant of Antigua, Henry Bolton by name,
who was not hampered by scruples or fear of the authorities.  Under
date of February 3, the Governor of Barbadoes had written to Mr.
Vernon, Secretary of the Lords of the Council of Trade and Plantations
in London:

"I received Yours of the 23rd. of November in relation to the
apprehending your notorious Pyrat Kidd.  He has not been heard of in
these Seas of late, nor do I believe he will think it safe to venture
himself here, where his Villainies are so well known; but if he does,
all the dilligence and application to find him out and seize him shall
be used on my part that can be, with the assistance of a heavy, crazy
Vessell, miscalled a Cruizer, that is ordered to attend upon me."

The first news of Kidd was received from the officials of the island of
Nevis who wrote Secretary Vernon on May 18, 1699, as follows:


Your letter of 23rd, November last in relation to that notorious Pirate
Capt. Kidd came safe to our hands ... have sent copies thereof to the
Lieut, or Deputy Governor of each respective island under this
Government: since which we have had this following acct. of the said
Kidd:

That he lately came from Mallagascoe,[5] in a large Gennowese vessell
of about foure hundred Tons; Thirty Guns mounted and eighty men.  And
in his way from those partes his men mutiny 'd and thirty of them lost
their lives: That his Vessell is very leaky; and that several of his
men have deserted him soe that he has not above five and twenty or
thirty hands on board.  About twenty days since he landed at Anguilla
... where he tarry'd about foure hours; but being refused Succour
sailed thence for the Island of St. Thomas ... and anchored off that
harbour three dayes, in which time he treated with them alsoe for
relief; but the Governor absolutely Denying him, he bore away further
to Leeward (as tis believ'd) for Porto Rico or Crabb Island.  Upon
which advice We forthwith ordered his Majestie's Ship _Queensborough_,
now attending this Government, Capt. Rupert Billingsly, Commander, to
make the best of his way after him.  And in case he met with his men,
vessell and effects, to bring them upp hither.

That no Imbezzlem't may be made, but that they may be secured until we
have given you advice thereof, and his Majestie's pleasure relating
thereto can be knowne, we shall by the first conveyance transmitt ye
like account of him to the Governor of Jamaica.  So that if he goes
farther to Leeward due care may be taken to secure him there.  As for
those men who have deserted him, we have taken all possible care to
apprehend them, especially if they come within the districts of this
Government, and hope on return of his Majestie's frigate we shall be
able to give you a more ample acct. hereof.

We are with all due Respect:

Rt. Hon'ble,
  YOUR MOST OBEDT. HUMBLE SERVANTS.


Kidd dodged all this hue and cry and was mightily anxious to get in
touch with Bellomont without loss of time.  He bought at Curacoa,
through the accommodating Henry Bolton, a Yankee sloop called the _San
Antonio_ and transferred his treasure and part of his crew to her.  The
_Quedah Merchant_ he convoyed as far as Hispaniola, now San Domingo,
and hid her in a small harbor with considerable cargo, in charge of a
handful of his men under direction of Bolton.

Then warily and of an uneasy mind, Captain Kidd steered his sloop for
the American coast and first touched at the fishing hamlet of Lewes at
the mouth of Delaware Bay.  All legend to the contrary, he made no
calls along the Carolinas and Virginia to bury treasure.  The testimony
of Kidd's crew and passengers cannot be demolished on this score,
besides which he expected to come to terms with Bellomont and adjust
his affairs within the law, so there was no sane reason for his
stopping to hide his valuables.

The first episode that smacks in the least of buried treasure occurred
while the sloop was anchored off Lewes.  There had come from the East
Indies as a passenger one James Gillam, pirate by profession, and he
wished no dealings with the authorities.  He therefore sent ashore in
Delaware Bay his sea chest which we may presume contained his private
store of stolen gold.  Gillam and his chest bob up in the letters of
Bellomont, but for the present let this reference suffice, as covered
by the statement of Edward Davis of London, mariner, made during the
proceedings against Kidd in Boston:


That in or about the month of November, 1697, the Examinant came
Boatswain of the ship _Fidelia_, Tempest Rogers, Commander, bound on a
trading voyage for India, and in the month of July following arrived at
the Island of Madagascar and after having been there about five weeks
the Ship sailed thence and left this Examinant in the Island, and being
desirous to get off, enter'd himself on board the Ship whereof Capt.
Kidd was Commander to worke for his passage, and accordingly came with
him in the sd. Ship to Hispaniola, and from thence in the Sloop
_Antonio_ to this place.

And that upon their arrival at the Hoor Kills, in Delaware Bay, there
was a chest belonging to one James Gillam put ashore there and at
Gard'ner's Island, there was several chests and packages put out of
Capt. Kidd's Sloop into a Sloop belonging to New Yorke.  He knows not
the quantity, nor anything sent on Shore at the sd. Island nor doth he
know that anything was put on Shore at any Island or place in this
Country, only two Guns of ... weight apeace or thereabout at Block
Island.

Signed, (his mark)
  EDWARD (E* D.) DAVIS.


In Delaware Bay Kidd bought stores, and five of the people of Lewes
were thrown into jail by the Pennsylvania authorities for having traded
with him.  Thence he sailed for Long Island Sound, entered it from the
eastward end, and made for New York, cautiously anchoring in Oyster
Bay, nowadays sedulously avoided by malefactors of great wealth.  It
was his purpose to open negotiations with Bellomont at long range,
holding his treasure as an inducement for a pardon.  From Oyster Bay he
sent a letter to a lawyer in New York, James Emmot who had before then
defended pirates, and also a message to his wife.  Emmot was asked to
serve as a go-between, and he hastened to join Kidd on the sloop,
explaining that Bellomont was in Boston.  Thereupon the _Antonio_
weighed anchor and sailed westward as far as Narragansett Bay where
Emmot landed and went overland to find Bellomont.



[1] Governor Henry Sloughter.

[2] Prizes.

[3] Prizes.

[4] Anguilla, or Snake Island, is a small island of the Leeward Group
of the West Indies, considerably east of Porto Rico, and near St.
Martin.  It belongs to England.

[5] Madagascar.




CHAPTER III

CAPTAIN KIDD, HIS TREASURE[1]

  "You captains brave and bold, hear our cries, hear our cries,
  You captains brave and bold, hear our cries.
  You captains brave and bold, though you seem uncontrolled,
  Don't for the sake of gold lose your souls, lose your souls,
  Don't for the sake of gold lose your souls."
        (_From the old Kidd ballad._)


The negotiations between Kidd and the Earl of Bellomont were no more
creditable to the royal governor than to the alleged pirate.  Already
the noble partners in England were bombarded with awkward questions
concerning the luckless enterprise, and Bellomont, anxious to clear
himself and his friends, was for getting hold of Kidd and putting him
in Boston jail at the earliest possible moment.  He dared not reveal
the true status of affairs to Kidd by means of correspondence lest that
wary bird escape him, and he therefore tried to coax him nearer in a
letter sent back in care of Emmot, that experienced legal adviser of
pirates in distress.  This letter of Bellomont was dated June 19, 1699,
and had this to say:


_Captain Kidd:_

Mr. Emmot came to me last Tuesday night late, telling me he came from
you, but was shy of telling me where he parted with you, nor did I
press him to it.  He told me you came to Oyster Bay in Nassau Island
and sent for him to New York.  He proposed to me from you that I would
grant you a pardon.  I answered that I had never granted one yet, and
that I had set myself a safe rule not to grant a pardon to anybody
whatsoever without the King's express leave or command.  He told me you
declared and protested your innocence, and that if your men could be
persuaded to follow your example, you would make no manner of scruple
of coming to this port or any other within her Majestie's Dominions;
that you owned there were two ships taken but that your men did it
violently against your will and had us'd you barbarously in imprisoning
you and treating you ill most part of the Voyage, and often attempting
to murder you.

Mr. Emmot delivered me two French passes taken on board the two ships
which your men rifled, which passes I have in my custody and I am apt
to believe they will be a good Article to justifie you if the peace
were not, by the Treaty between England and France, to operate in that
part of the world at the time the hostility was committed, as I almost
confident it was not to do!  Mr. Emmot also told me that you had to
about the value of 10,000 pounds in the Sloop with you, and that you
had left a Ship somewhere off the coast of Hispaniola in which there
was to the Value of 30,000 pounds more which you had left in safe hands
and had promised to go to your people in that Ship within three months
to fetch them with you to a safe harbour.

These are all the material particulars I can recollect that passed
between Mr. Emmot and me, only this, that you showed a great sense of
Honour and Justice in professing with many asseverations your settled
and serious design all along to do honor to your Commission and never
to do the least thing contrary to your duty and allegiance to the King.
And this I have to say in your defense that several persons at New York
who I can bring to evidence it, if there be occasion, did tell me that
by several advices from Madagascar and that part of the world, they
were informed of your men revolting from you in one place, which I am
pretty sure they said was at Madagascar; and that others of them
compelled you much against your will to take and rifle two Ships.

I have advised with his Majesty's Council and showed them this letter
this afternoon, and they are of opinion that if your case be so clear
as you (or Mr. Emmot for you) have said, that you may safely come
hither, and be equipped and fitted out to go and fetch the other Ship,
and I make no manner of doubt but to obtain the King's pardon for you
and those few men you have left, who I understand have been faithful to
you and refused as well as you to dishonor the Commission you had from
England.

I assure you on my word and on my honor I will performe nicely what I
have now promised, tho' this I declare before hand that whatever
treasure of goods you bring hither, I will not meddle with the least
bit of them, but they shall be left with such trusty persons as the
Council will advise until I receive orders from England how they shall
be disposed of.  Mr. Campbell will satisfie you that this that I have
now written is the Sense of the Council and of

YOUR HUMBLE SERVANT.
  (Not signed but endorsed, "A true copy, Bellomont.")


These were fair words but not as sincere as might have been.  Governor
Bellomont was anxious to lay hands on Kidd by fair means or foul, and
in the light of subsequent events this letter appears as a disingenuous
decoy.  It was carried back to Narragansett Bay by Emmot, and with him
Bellomont sent one Duncan Campbell, postmaster of Boston, as an
authorized agent to advance the negotiations.  Campbell was a Scotchman
who had been a friend of Kidd.  He is mentioned in John Dunton's
"Letter Written from New England, A. D. 1686."

"I rambled to the Scotch book-seller, one Campbell.  He is a brisk
young fellow that dresses All-a-mode, and sets himself off to the best
Advantage, and yet thrives apace.  I am told (and for his sake I wish
it may be true) that a Young Lady of Great Fortune has married him."

In reply to Bellomont's letter, thus delivered, Captain Kidd replied as
follows:


FROM BLOCK ISLAND ROAD, ON BOARD THE SLOOP ST. ANTONIO,

June 24th, 1699.

_May It please your Excellencie_:

I am hon'rd with your Lordship's kind letter of ye 19th., Current by
Mr. Campbell which came to my hands this day, for which I return my
most hearty thanks.  I cannot but blame myself for not writing to your
Lordship before this time, knowing it was my duty, but the clamorous
and false stories that has been reported of me made me fearful of
writing or coming into any harbor till I could hear from your Lordship.
I note the contents of your Lordship's letter as to what Mr. Emmot and
Mr. Campbell Informed your Lordship of my proceedings.  I do affirm it
to be true, and a great deal more may be said of the abuses of my men
and the hardships I have undergone to preserve the Ship and what goods
my men had left.  Ninety-five men went away from me in one day and went
on board the _Moca Frigott_, Captain Robert Cullifer, Commander, who
went away to the Red Seas and committed several acts of pyracy as I am
informed, and am afraid that because of the men formerly belonging to
my Galley, the report is gone home against me to the East India
Companee.

A Sheet of paper will not contain what may be said of the care I took
to preserve the Owners' interest and to come home to clear up my own
Innocency.  I do further declare and protest that I never did in the
least act Contrary to the King's Commission, nor to the Reputation of
my honorable Owners, and doubt not but I shall be able to make my
Innocency appear, or else I had no need to come to these parts of the
world, if it were not for that, and my owners' Interest.

There is five or six passengers that came from Madagascar to assist me
in bringing the Ship home, and about ten of my own men that came with
me would not venture to go into Boston till Mr. Campbell had Ingaged
body for body for them that they should not be molested while I staid
at Boston, or till I returned with the ship.  I doubt not but your
Lordship will write to England in my favor and for these few men that
are left.  I wish your Lordship would persuade Mr. Campbell to go home
to England with your Lordship's letters, who will be able to give
account of our affairs and diligently forward the same that there may
be speedy answer from England.

I desired Mr. Campbell to buy a thousand weight of rigging for the
fitting of the Ship, to bring her to Boston, that I may not be delay'd
when I come there.  Upon receiving your Lordship's letter I am making
the best of my way for Boston.  This with my humble duty to your
Lordship and the Countess is what offers from,

My Lord, Your Excellency's
  Most humble and dutyfull Servant,
    WM. KIDD.


Notwithstanding these expressions of confidence, Kidd suspected
Bellomont's intentions and decided to leave his treasure in safe hands
instead of carrying it to Boston with him.  Now follows the documentary
narrative of the only authenticated buried treasure of Captain Kidd and
the proofs that he had no other booty of any account.  At the eastern
end of Long Island Sound is a beautiful wooded island of three thousand
acres which has been owned by the Gardiner family as a manor since the
first of them, Lionel Gardiner, obtained a royal grant almost three
centuries ago.  In June of 1699, John Gardiner, third of the line of
proprietors, sighted a strange sloop anchored in his island harbor, and
rowed out to make the acquaintance of Captain William Kidd who had
crossed from Narragansett Bay in the San Antonio.  What happened
between them and how the treasure was buried and dug up is told in the
official testimony of John Gardiner, dated July 17th, 1699.


"THE NARRATIVE OF JOHN GARD(I)NER OF GARD(I)NER ISLAND, ALIAS ISLE OF
WIGHT, RELATING TO CAPTAIN WILLIAM KIDD.

That about twenty days ago Mr. Emmot of New York came to the Narrator's
house and desired a boat to go to New York, telling the Narrator he
came from my Lord at Boston, whereupon the Narrator furnished Mr. Emmot
with a boat and he went for New York.  And that evening the Narrator
saw a Sloop with six guns riding an Anchor off Gardiner's Island and
two days afterwards in the evening the Narrator went on board said
Sloop to enquire what she was.

And so soon as he came on board, Capt. Kidd (then unknown to the
Narrator) asked him how himself and family did, telling him that he,
the said Kidd, was going to my Lord at Boston, and desired the Narrator
to carry three Negroes, two boys and a girl ashore to keep till he, the
said Kidd, or his order should call for them, which the Narrator
accordingly did.

That about two hours after the Narrator had got the said Negroes
ashore, Capt. Kidd sent his boat ashore with two bales of goods and a
Negro boy; and the morning after, the said Kidd desired the Narrator to
come immediately on board and bring six Sheep with him for his voyage
for Boston, which the Narrator did.  Kidd asked him to spare a barrel
of Cyder, which the Narrator with great importunity consented to, and
sent two of his men for it, who brought the Cyder on board said Sloop.
Whilst the men were gone for the Cyder, Capt. Kidd offered the Narrator
several pieces of damnified[2] Muslin and Bengali as a present to his
Wife, which the said Kidd put in a bagg and gave the Narrator.  And
about a quarter of an hour afterwards the said Kidd took up two or
three (more) pieces of damnified Muslin and gave the Narrator for his
proper use.

And the Narrator's men then coming on board with the said barrel of
Cyder as aforesaid, Kidd gave them a piece of Arabian gold for their
trouble and also for bringing him word.  Then the said Kidd, ready to
sail, told this Narrator he would pay him for the Cyder, to which the
Narrator answered that he was already satisfied for it by the Present
made to his wife.  And it was observed that some of Kidd's men gave to
the Narrator's men some inconsiderable things of small value which were
Muslins for neck-cloths.

And then the Narrator tooke leave of the said Kidd and went ashore and
at parting the said Kidd fired four guns and stood for Block Island.
About three days afterwards, said Kidd sent the Master of the Sloop and
one Clark in his boat for the Narrator who went on board with them, and
the said Kidd desired him to take ashore with him and keep for him a
Chest and a box of Gold and a bundle of Quilts and four bales of Goods,
which box of Gold the said Kidd told the Narrator was intended for my
Lord.  And the Narrator complied with the request and took on Shore the
said Chest, box of Gold, quilts and bales goods.

And the Narrator further saith that two of Kidd's crew who went by the
names of Cooke and Parrat delivered to him, the Narrator, two baggs of
Silver which they said weighed thirty pound weight, for which he gave
receipt.  And that another of Kidd's men delivered to the Narrator a
small bundle of gold and gold dust of about a pound weight to keep for
him, and did present the Narrator with a sash and a pair of wortsed
stockins.  And just before the Sloop sailed, Capt. Kidd presented the
Narrator with a bagg of Sugar, and then took leave and sailed for
Boston.

And the Narrator further saith he knew nothing of Kidd's being
proclaimed a Pyrate, and if he had, he durst not have acted otherwise
than he had done, having no force to oppose them and for that he hath
formerly been threatened to be killed by Privateers if he should carry
unkindly to them.

The within named Narrator further saith that while Capt. Kidd lay with
his Sloop at Gardner's Island, there was a New York Sloop whereof one
Coster is master, and his mate was a little black man, unknown by name,
who as it is was said, had been formerly Capt. Kidd's quartermaster,
and another Sloop belonging to New Yorke, Jacob Fenick, Master, both
which lay near to Kidd's Sloop three days together.  And whilst the
Narrator was on board with Capt. Kidd, there was several bales of Goods
put on board the other two Sloops aforesaid, and the said two Sloops
sailed up the Sound.  After which Kidd sailed with his sloop for Block
Island; and being absent by the space of three days, returned to
Gardner's Island again in Company of another Sloop belonging to New
York, Cornelius Quick, Master, on board of which were one Thomas Clarke
of Setauket, commonly called Whisking Clarke, and one Harrison of
Jamaica, father to a boy that was with Capt. Kidd, and Capt. Kidd's
Wife was then on board his own Sloop.

And Quick remained with his Sloop there from noon to the evening of the
same day, and took on board two Chests that came out of Kidd's Sloop,
under the observance of this Narrator, and he believes several Goods
more and then Sailed up the Sound.  Kidd remained there with his Sloop
until next morning, and then set sail intending, as he said, for
Boston.  Further the Narrator saith that the next day after Quick
sailed with his Sloop from Gardner's Island he saw him turning out of a
Bay called Oyster Pan Bay, altho' the wind was all the time fair to
carry him up the Sound.  The Narrator supposes he went in thither to
land some Goods.

JOHN GARDINER.

Boston, July 17th, 1699.

The Narrator, John Gardiner, under Oath before his Excellency and
Council unto the truth of his Narrative in this sheet of paper.

ADDINGTON, Sec'ry."


This artless recital has every earmark of truth, and it was confirmed
in detail by other witnesses and later events.  Before we fall to
digging up the treasure of Gardiner's Island, carried ashore in the
"Chest and box of Gold," it is well to follow those other goods which
were carried away in the sloops about which so much has been said by
John Gardiner.  No more is heard of that alluring figure, "the little
black man, unknown by name, who as it was said had been formerly Capt.
Kidd's Quarter-Master," but "Whisking" Clarke was duly overhauled.  All
of the plunder transferred from Kidd's sloop to those other craft was
consigned to him, and some of it was put ashore at Stamford, Conn., in
charge of a Major Sellick who had a warehouse hard by the Sound.
Clarke was arrested by order of Bellomont and gave a bond of L12,000
that he would deliver up all to the government.  This he did, without
doubt, but legend has been busy with this enterprising "Whisking"
Clarke.

======================================================================

[Illustration: John Gardiner's sworn statement of the goods and
treasure left with him by Kidd.]

Governor Bellomont's endorsement of the official inventory of Kidd's
treasure found on Gardiner's Island.

======================================================================

In the Connecticut River off the "upper end of Pine Meadow," near
Northfield, Mass., is Clarke's Island which was granted by the town to
William Clarke in 1686, and confirmed to his heirs in 1723, It then
contained ten and three-fourth acres, and was a secluded spot, well
covered with trees.  Later, what with cutting off the woods and the
work of the freshets, a large part of the island was washed away.  It
was here, tradition has it, that some of Kidd's treasure was hidden by
"Whisking" Clarke.

The local story is that Kidd and his men ascended the river, though how
they got over the series of falls is not explained, and made a landing
at Clarke's Island.  Here, having placed the chest in a hole, they
sacrificed by lot one of their number and laid his body on top of the
treasure in order that his ghost might forever defend it from
fortune-seekers.  One Abner Field, after consulting a conjurer who
showed him precisely where the chest was buried resolved to risk a
tussle with the pirate's ghost, and with two friends waited in fear and
trembling for the auspicious time when the moon should be directly
overhead at midnight.

They were to work in silence, and to pray that no cock should crow
within earshot and break the spell.  At length, one of them raised his
crow-bar for a mighty stroke, down it went, and clinked against metal.
"You've hit it," cried another, and alas, instantly the chest sank out
of reach, and the ghost appeared, and very angry it was.  A moment
later, the devil himself popped from under the bank, ripped across the
island like a tornado and plunged into the river with a prodigious,
hissing splash.  The treasure hunters flew for home, and told their
tale, but village rumor whispered it about that one Oliver Smith and a
confederate had impersonated the ghost and the energetic Evil One.

On October 20, 1699, Bellomont wrote in a letter to England:


"I have prevailed with Governor Winthrop of Connecticut to seize and
send Thomas Clarke of N. York prisoner hither.  He has been on board
Kidd's sloop at the east end of Long Island and carried off to the
value of about 5000 pounds in goods and treasure (that we know of and
perhaps a great deal more) into Connecticut Colony; and thinking
himself safe from under our power, writ my Lt. Governor of New York a
very saucy letter and bade us defiance.  I have ordered him to be
safely kept prisoner in the fort, because the gaol of New York is weak
and insufficient.  And when orders come to me to send Kidd and his men
to England (which I long for impatiently), I will also send Clarke[3]
as an associate of Kidd."


Three days later, the Lieutenant Governor of New York wrote Bellomont
as follows:


"Clarke proffers 12,000 pounds good Security and will on oath deliver
up all the goods he hath been entrusted with from Kidd, provided he may
go and fetch them himself, but says he will rather die or be undone
than to bring his friends into a Predicament.  I told him if he would
let me know where I might secure these goods or Bullion, I would
recommend his case to your Lordship's favour.  He answered 'twas
impossible to recover anything until he went himself."


After leaving the bulk of his treasure on Gardiner's Island, Kidd
received another friendly message from Lord Bellomont, and was by now
persuaded that he could go to Boston without danger.  With his wife on
board his sloop, and she stood by him staunchly, he laid a course
around Cape Cod and made port on the first day of July.  Captain and
Mrs. William Kidd found lodgings in the house of their friend, Duncan
Campbell, and he walked unmolested for a week, passing some of the time
in the Blue Anchor tavern.  "Being a very resolute fellow," wrote
Hutchinson, "when the officer arrested him in his lodgings, he
attempted to draw his sword, but a young gentleman who accompanied the
officer, laying hold of his arm, prevented him and he submitted."


In the letters of Lord Bellomont to the Lords of Plantations and
Colonies are fully related the particulars of Kidd's downfall and of
the finding of his treasure.  On July 26th, he stated:


"_My Lords:_

"I gave your Lordships a short account of my taking Capt. Kidd in my
letter of the 8th. Inst.  I shall in this letter confine myself wholly
to an account of my proceedings with him.  On the 13th, of last month
Mr. Emmot, a lawyer of N. York came to me late at night and told me he
came from Capt. Kidd who was on the Coast with a Sloop, but would not
tell me where; that Kidd had brought 60 pounds weight of gold, about
100 weight of silver, and 17 bales of East India goods (which was less
by 24 bales than we have since got out of the sloop).  That Kidd had
left behind him a great Ship near the coast of Hispaniola that nobody
but himself could find out, on board whereof there were in bale goods,
saltpetre, and other things to the value of at least 30,000 pounds.
That if I would give him a pardon, he would bring in the sloop and
goods hither and fetch his great ship and goods afterwards.

"Mr. Emmot delivered me that night two French passes which Kidd took on
board the two Moors' ships which were taken by him in the seas of India
(or as he alleged by his men against his will).  One of the passes
wants a date in the original as in the copy I sent your Lordships, and
they go (No. 1) and (No. 2).  On the said 19th. of June as I sat in
Council I wrote a letter to Capt. Kidd and showed it to the Council,
and they approving of it I despatched Mr. Campbell again to Kidd with
my said letter, a copy whereof goes (No. 4).  Your Lordships may
observe that the promise I made Capt. Kidd in my said letter of a kind
reception and procuring the King's pardon for him, is conditional, that
is, provided he were as Innocent as he pretended to be.  But I quickly
found sufficient cause to suspect him very guilty, by the many lies and
contradictions he told me.

"I was so much upon my guard with Kidd that he arriving here on
Saturday of this month, I would not see him but before witnesses; nor
have I ever seen him but in Council twice or thrice that we examined
him, and the day he was taken up by the Constable.  It happened to be
by the door of my Lodging, and he rush'd in and came rushing to me, the
Constable after him.  I had him not seiz'd till Thursday, the 6th Inst.
for I had a mind to discover where he had left the great Ship, and I
thought myself secure enough from his running away because I took care
not to give him the least umbrage or design of seizing him.  Nor had I
till that day (that I produced my orders from Court for apprehending)
communicated them to anybody and I found it necessary to show my order
to the Council to animate them to join heartily with me in securing
Kidd and examining his affairs nicely,[4] ... discover what we could of
his behaviour in his whole voyage.  Another reason why I took him up no
sooner was that he had brought his wife and children hither in his
Sloop with him who I believ'd he would not easily forsake.

"He being examined twice or thrice by me and the Council, and also some
of his men, I observed he seemed much disturbed, and the last time we
examined him I fancied he looked as if he were upon the wing and
resolved to run away.  And the Gentlemen of the Council had some of
them the same thought with mine, so that I took their consent in
seizing and committing him.  But the officers appointed to seize his
men were so careless as to let three or four of his men escape which
troubled me the more because they were old N. York Pyrates.  The next
thing the Council and I did was to appoint a Committee of trusty
persons to search for the goods and treasure brought by Kidd and to
secure what they should find till the King's pleasure should be known
as to the disposition thereof, as my orders from Mr. Secretary Vernon
import.  The said Committee were made up of two Gentlemen of the
Council, two merchants, and the Deputy Collector, whose names are to
the enclosed Inventory of the goods and treasure.

"They searched Kidd's lodgings and found hid and made up in two sea
beds a bag of gold dust and Ingots of the value of about 1000 pounds
and a bag of silver, part money and part pieces and piggs of silver,
value as set down in the said Inventory.  In the above bag of gold were
several little bags of gold; all particulars are very justly and
exactly set down in the Inventory.  For my part I have meddled with no
matter of thing under the management of the Council, and into the
Custody of the aforementioned Committee, that I might be free from the
suspicion and censure of the world.

"The enamel'd box mentioned in the beginning of the Inventory is that
which Kidd made a present of to my wife by Mr. Campbell, which I
delivered in Council to the said Committee to keep with the rest of the
treasure.  There was in it a stone ring which we take to be a Bristol
stone.  If it was true[5] it would be worth about 40 pounds, and there
was a small stone unset which we believe is also counterfeit, and a
sort of a Locket with four sparks which seem to be right diamonds: for
there's nobody that understands Jewels[6] ... box and all that's in it
were right, they cannot be worth above 60 pounds.

"Your Lordships will see in the middle of the Inventory a parcel of
treasure and Jewels delivered up by Mr. Gardiner of Gardiner's Island
in the province of New York and at the East end of Nassau Island, the
recovery and saving of which treasure is owing to my own care and
quickness.  I heard by the greatest accident in the world the day Capt.
Kidd was committed, that a man[6] ... offered 30 pounds for a sloop to
carry him to Gardiner's Island, and Kidd having owned to burying some
gold on that Island (though he never mentioned to us any jewels nor do
I believe he would have own'd to the gold there but that he thought he
should himself be sent for it), I privately posted away a messenger to
Mr. Gardiner in the King's name to come forthwith and deliver up such
treasure as Kidd or any of his crew had lodg'd with him, acquainting
him that I had committed Kidd to Gaol as I was ordered to do by the
King.

"My messenger made great haste and was with Gardiner before anybody,
and Gardiner, who is a very substantial man, brought away the treasure
without delay; and by my direction delivered it into the hands of the
Committee.  If the Jewels be right, as 'tis suppos'd they are, but I
never saw them nor the gold and silver brought by Gardiner, then we
guess that the parcel brought by him may be worth (gold, silver, and
Jewels) 4500 pounds.  And besides Kidd had left six bales of goods with
him, one of which was twice as big as any of the rest, and Kidd gave
him a particular charge of that bale and told him 'twas worth 2000
pounds.  The six bales Gardiner could not bring, but I have ordered him
to send 'em by a Sloop that is since gone from hence to N. York, and
which is to return speedily.

"We are not able to set an exact value on the goods and treasure we
have got because we have not open'd the bales we took on board the
(Kidd's) sloop, but we hope when the six bales are sent in by Gardiner,
what will be in the hands of the Gentlemen appointed to that trust will
amount to about 14,000 pounds.

"I have sent strict orders to my Lt. Governor at N. York to make
diligent search for the goods and treasure sent by Kidd to N. York in
three Sloops mentioned in Gardiner's affidavit.[7] ... I have directed
him where to find a purchase[8] in a house in N. York which I am apt to
believe will be found in that house.  I have sent to search elsewhere a
certain place strongly suspected to have received another deposition of
gold from Kidd.

"I am also upon the hunt after two or three Arch-Pyrates which I hope
to give your Lordships a good account of by the next conveyance.  If I
could have but a good able Judge and Attorney General at N. York, a
man-of-war there and another here, and the companies recruited and well
paid, I will rout Pyrates and pyracy entirely out of this North part of
America, but as I have too often told your Lordships 'tis impossible
for me to do all this alone in my single person.

"I wrote your Lordships in my last letter of the 8th. Inst. that
Bradish, the Pyrate, and one of his crew were escap'd out of the gaol
in this town.  We have since found that the Gaoler was Bradish's
kinsman, and the Gaoler confessed they went out at the prison door and
that he found it wide open.  We had all the reason in the world to
believe the Gaoler was consenting to the escape.  By much ado I could
get the Council to resent the Gaoler's behavior, and by my Importunity
I had the fellow before us.  We examin'd him, and by his own story and
account given us of his suffering other prisoners formerly to escape, I
prevailed to have him turn'd out and a prosecution order'd against him
to the Attorney Gen'l.  I have also with some difficulty this last
session of Assembly here, got a bill to pass that the Gaol be committed
to the care of the High Sheriff of the County, as in England with a
salary of 30 pounds paid to the said Sheriff.

"I am forced to allow the Sheriff 40 Shillings per week for keeping
Kidd safe.  Otherwise I should be in some doubt about him.  He has
without doubt a great deal of gold, which is apt to corrupt men that
have not principles of honour.  I have therefore, to try the power of
Iron against Gold, put him into irons that weigh 16 pounds.  I thought
it moderate enough, for I remember poor Dr. Gates[9] had a 100 weight
of Iron on him while he was a prisoner in the late reign.

"There never was a greater liar or thief in the world than this Kidd;
notwithstanding he assured the Council and me every time we examined
him that the great Ship and her cargo awaited his return to bring her
hither, and now your Lordships will see by the several informations of
Masters of Ships from Curacoa that the cargo has been sold there, and
in one of them 'tis said they have burnt that noble ship.  And without
doubt, it was by Kidd's order, that the ship might not be an evidence
against him, for he would not own to us that her name was the _Quedah
Merchant_, tho' his men did.

"Andres ...[10] eyne and two more brought the first news to New York of
the sale of that cargo at Curacoa, nor was ever such pennyworths heard
for cheapness.  Captain Evertz is he who has brought the news of the
ship's being burnt.  She was about 500 tons, and Kidd told us at
Council that never was there a stronger or stauncher ship seen.  His
lying had like to have involved me in a contract that would have been
very chargeable and to no manner of purpose.  I was advised by the
Council to dispatch a Ship of good condition to go and fetch away that
ship and cargo.  I had agreed for a ship of 300 tons, 22 guns, and I
was to man her with 60 men to force (if there had been need of it) the
men to yield who were left with the ship.

"I was just going to seal the writing, when I bethought myself 'twere
best to press Kidd once more to tell me the truth.  I therefore sent to
him two gentlemen of the Council to the gaol, and he at last own'd that
he had left a power (of attorney) with one Henry Bolton, a Merchant of
Antigua, to whom he had committed the care of the ship, to sell and
dispose of all the cargo.  Upon which confession of Kidd's I held my
hand from hiring that great ship which would have cost 1700 pounds by
computation, and now to-morrow I send the sloop Kidd came in with
letters to the Lieut. Govn'r of Antigua, Col. Yoemans, and to the
Governors of St. Thomas Island and Curacoa to seize and secure what
effects they can that were late in the possession of Kidd and on board
the _Quedah Merchant_.

"There is one Burt, an Englishman, that lives at St. Thomas, who has
got a great store of the goods and money for Kidd's account.  St.
Thomas belongs to the Danes, but I hope to retrieve what Burt has in
his hands.  The sending this Sloop will cost but about 300 pounds, if
she be out three months.  I hope your Lordships will take care that
immediate orders will be sent to Antigua to secure Bolton who must have
played the Knave egregiously, for he could not but know that Kidd came
knavishly by the ship and goods.

"'Tis reported that the Dutch at Curacoa have loaded three sloops with
goods and sent them to Holland.  Perhaps 'twere not amiss to send and
watch their arrival in Holland, if it be practicable to lay claim to
'em there.

"Since my commitment of Kidd, I heard that upon his approach to this
port, his heart misgave him and he proposed to his men putting out to
sea again, and going to Caledonia, the new Scotch settlement near
Darien, but they refused.  I desire I may have orders what to do with
Kidd and all his and Bradish's crew, for as the Law stands in this
Country, if a Pyrate were convicted, yet he cannot suffer death; and
the Council here refused the bill to punish Privateers and Pyrates,
which your Lordships sent with me from England with a direction to
recommend it at N. York and here, to be passed into a Law....

"You will observe by some of the information I now send that Kidd did
not only rob the two Moors' ships, but also a Portuguese ship, which he
denied absolutely to the Council and me.  I send your Lordships 24
several papers and evidences relating to Capt. Kidd.  'Tis impossible
for me to animadvert and make remarks on the several matters contain'd
in the said papers in the weak condition I am at present...."


My Lord Bellomont was in the grip of the gout at this time, which
misfortune perhaps increased his irritation toward his partner, Captain
William Kidd.  In a previous letter to the authorities in London, this
royal governor had explained quite frankly that he was trying to lure
the troublesome pirate into his clutches, and called Emmot, the lawyer,
"a cunning Jacobite, a fast friend of Fletcher's[11] and my avowed
enemie."  He also made this interesting statement:


"I must not forget to tell your Lordships that Campbell brought three
or four small Jewels to my Wife which I was to know nothing of, but she
came quickly and discover'd them to me and asked me whether she would
keep them, which I advised her to do for the present, for I reflected
that my showing an over nicety might do hurt before I had made a full
discovery what goods and treasure were in the Sloop....

"Mr. Livingston also came to me in a peremptory manner and demanded up
his Bond and the articles which he seal'd to me upon Kidd's Expedition,
and told me that Kidd swore all the Oaths in the world that unless I
did immediately indemnify Mr. Livingston by giving up his Securities,
he would never bring in that great ship and cargo.  I thought this was
such an Impertinence in both Kidd and Livingston that it was time for
me to look about me, and to secure Kidd.  I had noticed that he
designed my wife a thousand pounds in gold dust and Ingotts last
Thursday, but I spoil'd his compliment by ordering him to be arrested
and committed that day, showing the Council's orders from Court for
that purpose....

"If I had kept Mr. Secretary Vernon's orders for seizing and securing
Kidd and his associates with all their effects with less secrecy, I had
never got him to come in, for his countrymen, Mr. Graham and
Livingston, would have been sure to caution him to shift for himself
and would have been well paid for their pains."


One by one, Kidd's plans for clearing himself were knocked into a
cocked hat.  His lawyer did him no good, his hope of bribing the
Countess of Bellomont with jewels, "gold dust and Ingotts" went wrong,
and his buried treasure of Gardiner's Island was dug up and confiscated
by officers of the Crown.  It is regrettable that history, by one of
its curious omissions, tells us no more about this titled lady.  Did
Kidd have reason to suppose that she would take his gifts and try to
befriend him?  When he was in high favor she may, perchance, have
admired this dashing shipmaster and privateer as he spun his
adventurous yarns in the Governor's mansion.  He may have jestingly
promised to fetch her home jewels and rich silk stuffs of the Indies
filched from pirates.  At any rate, she was not to be bought over, and
Kidd sat in jail anchored by those sixteen-pound irons, and biting his
nails in sullen wrath and disappointment, while a messenger was posting
to Gardiner's Island with this order from Bellomont to the proprietor:


BOSTON IN NEW ENGLAND, 8th July, 1699...

_Mr. Gardiner:_

Having received the King's express Orders for Seizing and Securing the
body of Capt. Kidd and all his associates together with all their
effects till I should receive his Majesty's Royal pleasure how to
dispose of the same, I have accordingly secured Capt. Kidd in the Gaol
of this Town and some of his men.  He has been examined by myself and
the Council and has confessed among other things that he left with you
a parcel of gold made up in a box and some other parcels besides, all
of which I require you in his Majesty's name immediately to fetch
hither to me, that I may secure them for his Majesty's use, and I shall
recompense your pains in coming hither.

I am,

Your friend and servant,
  BELLOMONT.

======================================================================

[Illustration: The official inventory of the Kidd treasure found on
Gardiner's Island.  This is the only original and authenticated record
of any treasure belonging to Captain Kidd.  (From the British State
Papers in the Public Record Office, London.)]

======================================================================

The box and the chest were promptly delivered by honest John Gardiner,
who had no mind to be mixed in the affairs of the now notorious Kidd,
together with the bales of goods left in his care.  This booty was
inventoried by order of Bellomont and the Governor's Council and the
original document is photographed herewith, as found in the Public
Record Office, London.  It possessed a singular interest because it
records and vouches for the only Kidd treasure ever discovered.  Nor
are its detailed items a mere dusty catalogue of figures and
merchandise.  This is a document to gloat over.  If one has a spark of
imagination, he smacks his lips.  Instead of legend and myth, here is a
veritable pirate's hoard, exactly as it should be, with its bags of
gold, bars of silver, "Rubies great and small," candlesticks and
porringers, diamonds and so on.  The inventory contains also other
booty found in the course of the treasure hunt, and lest the document
itself may prove too hard reading, its contents are transcribed as
follows to convince the most skeptical mind that there was a real Kidd
treasure and that it was found in the Year of our Lord, 1699.


BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND, July 25th, 1699.

A true Accompt. of all such Gold, Silver, Jewels, and Merchandises in
the Possession of Capt. William Kidd, Which have been seized and
secured by us under-writing Pursuant to an Order from his Excellency,
Richard, Earle of Bellomont, Capt. Generall and Governor-in-Chief in
and over his Majestie's Province of ye Massachusetts Bay, etc., bearing
date[12] ... 1699, Vizt.

In Capt. William Kid's Box--

  One Bag Fifty-three Silver Barrs.
  One Bag Seventy-nine Barrs and pieces of silver....
  One Bag Seventy-four Bars Silver.

  One Enamel'd Silver Box in which are 4 diamonds
  set in gold Lockets, one diamond loose,
  one large diamond set in a gold ring.

Found in Mr. Duncan Campbell's House,

  No. 1.  One Bag Gold.
      2.  One Bag Gold.
      3.  One Handkerchief Gold.
      4.  One Bag Gold.
      5.  One Bag Gold.
      6.  One Bag Gold.
      7.  One Bag Gold.

Also Twenty Dollars, one halfe and one quart. pcs. of eight, Nine
English Crowns, one small Barr of Silver, one small Lump Silver, a
small Chaine, a small bottle, a Corral Necklace, one pc. white and one
pc. of Checkquer'd Silk....

In Capt. William Kidd's Chests--Two Silver Boxons, Two Silver
Candlesticks, one Silver Porringer, and some small things of
Silver--Rubies small and great Sixty-seven, Green Stones two.  One
large Load Stone....

Landed from on board the Sloop _Antonio_ Capt. Wm. Kidd late
Command....  57 Baggs of Sugar, 17 pieces canvis, 38 Bales of
Merchandize.

Received from Mr. Duncan Campbell Three Bailes Merchandise, Whereof one
he had opened being much damnified by water....  Eighty-five ps. Silk
Rumals and Bengalis, Sixty ps. Callicoes and Muslins.

  Received the 17th. instant of Mr. John Gardiner.

  No. 1.  One Bag dust Gold.
      2.  One Bag Coyned Gold and in it silver.
      3.  One p'cl dust Gold.
      4.  One Bag three Silver Rings and Sundry precious
          stones.  One bag of unpolished Stones.  One
          ps. of Cristol and Bazer Stone, Two Cornelion
          Rings, two small Agats.  Two Amathests all in
          the same Bag.
      5.  One Bag Silver Buttons and a Lamp.
      6.  One Bag broken Silver.
      7.  One Bag Gold Bars.
      8.  One Bag Gold Barrs.
      9.  One Bag Dust Gold.
     10.  One Bag of Silver Bars.
     11.  One Bag Silver Bars.

The whole of the Gold above mentioned is Eleven hundred, and Eleven
ounces, Troy Weight.

The silver is Two Thousand, three Hundred, Fifty-three ounces.

The Jewels or Precious Stones Weight are seventeen Ounces ... an Ounce,
and Six[13] ... Stone by Tale.

The Sugar is Contained in Fifty-Seven Baggs.

The Merchandize is Contained in Forty-one Bailes.

The Canvis is Seventeen pieces.

  SAM. SEWALL.
  NATH'L BYFIELD.
  JER. DUMMER.
  LAUR. HAMMOND, Lt. Coll.
  ANDR. BELCHER.

_Endorsed:_

Inventory of the Gold, Silver, Jewels and Merchandize late in the
possession of Capt. Wm.  Kidd and Seiz'd and secured by ordr. of the E.
of Bellomont, 28th of July 1699.  This is an original paper.

BELLOMONT."

======================================================================

[Illustration: A memorandum of Captain Kidd's treasure left on
Gardiner's Island.  This is his own declaration, signed and sworn.]

======================================================================

That famous sloop, the _San Antonio_, was also carefully inventoried
but her contents were for the most part sea gear and rough furnishings,
barring a picturesque entry of "ye boy Barleycorn," an apprentice
seaman who had sailed with Kidd.  Robert Livingston has something to
say about Kidd's property in his statement under examination, which has
been preserved as follows:

"Robert Livingston, Esq. being notified to appear before his Excellency
and Council this day and sworn to give a true Narrative and Relation of
his knowledge or information of any Goods, Gold, Silver, Bullion, or
other Treasure lately imported by Capt. William Kidd, his Company and
Accomplices, or any of them, into this Province, or any other of his
Majesty's Provinces, Colonies, or Territories in America, and by them
or any of them imbezelled, concealed, conveyed away, or any ways
disposed of, saith:

"That hearing Capt. Kidd was come into these parts to apply himself
unto his Excellency the Earl of Bellomont, the said Narrator came
directly from Albany ye nearest way through the woods to meet the said
Kidd here and to wait upon his Lordship.  And at his arrival at Boston
Capt. Kidd informed him there was on board his Sloop then in Port forty
bales of Goods, and some Sugar, and also said he had about eighty pound
weight in Plate.  The Narrator does not remember whether he said this
was on board the Sloop or not.  And further the sd. Kidd said he had
Forty pound weight in Gold which he hid and secured in some place in
the Sound betwixt this and New York, not naming any particular place,
which nobody could find but himself.  And that all the said Goods,
Gold, Plate and Sloop was for accompt. of the Owners of the _Adventure
Galley_, whereof this Narrator was one.

"And upon further discourse, Kidd acknowledged that several Chests and
bundles of Goods belonging to the men were taken out of his Sloop
betwixt this place and New York, and put into other sloops, saying he
was forced thereto, that his men would otherwise have run the Sloop on
shore.  And he likewise acknowledged that he had given Mr. Duncan
Campbell one hundred pieces of eight when he was on board his Sloop at
Rhode Island.  And he knows no further of any concealment, imbezelment,
or disposal made by said Kidd, his Company, or accomplices of any
Goods, Gold, money, or Treasure whatsoever, saving that Kidd did
yesterday acknowledge to this Narrator that ye Gold aforementioned was
hid upon Gardiner's Island.  He believed there was about fifty pound
weight of it and that in the same box with it there was about three or
four hundred pieces of eight and some pieces of Plate belonging to his
boy Barleycorn and his Negro man which he had gotten by[14] ... for the
men.  Also the said Kidd gave this Narrator a negro boy and another to
Mr. Duncan Campbell."


There is reproduced herewith the original statement of Kidd touching
this Gardiner Island treasure.  The document is badly torn and
disfigured, but the gaps can be supplied from a copy made at that time,
and here is what he had to say under oath:


BOSTON, Sept. 4th. 1699.

Captain William Kidd declareth and Saith that in his Chest which he
left at Gardiner's Island there were three small baggs or more of
Jasper Antonio, or Stone of Goa, several pieces of silk stript with
Silver and gold Cloth of Silver, about a Bushell of Cloves and Nutmegs
mixed together, and strawed up and down, several books of fine white
Callicoa, several pieces of fine Muzlins, several pieces more of
flowered silk.  He does not well remember what further was in it.  He
had an invoice thereof in his other chest.  All that was contained in
ye said Chest was bought by him and some given him at Madagascar.
Nothing thereof was taken in ye ship Quidah Merchant.  He esteemed it
to be of greater value than all else that he left at Gardiner's Island
except ye Gold and Silver.  There was neither Gold nor Silver in ye
Chest.  It was fastened with a Padlock and nailed and corded about.

Further saith that he left at said Gardiner's Island a bundle of nine
or ten fine Indian quilts, some of ye silk with fringes and Tassels.

WM. KIDD.


The Earl of Bellomont was as keen as a bloodhound on the scent of
treasure and it is improbable that any of the Kidd plunder escaped his
search.  He lost no time in the quest of that James Gillam whose chest
had been landed in Delaware Bay, and a singularly diverting episode is
related by Bellomont in one of his written reports to the Council of
Trade and Plantations:

"I gave you an account, Oct. 24th, of my taking Joseph Bradish and
Wetherly, and writ that I hoped in a little time to be able to send
News of my taking James Gillam, the Pyrate that killed Capt. Edgecomb,
commander of the _Mocha Frigate_ for the East India Co., and that with
his own hand, while the captain was asleep.  Gillam is supposed to be
the man that encouraged the Ship's Company to turn pyrates, and the
ship has ever since been robbing in the Red Sea and Seas of India.  If
I may believe the report of men lately come from Madagascar, she has
taken above 2,000,000 pounds sterling.

"I have been so lucky as to take James Gillam, and he is now in irons
in the gaol of this town.  And at the same time we seized on Francis
Dole, in whose house he was harboured, who proved to be one of Hore's
crew.  My taking of Gillam was so very accidental one would believe
there was a strange fatality in the man's stars.  On Saturday, 11th
inst., late in the evening, I had a letter from Col. Sanford, Judge of
the Admiralty Court in Rhode Island, giving me an account that Gillam
had been there, but was come towards Boston a fortnight before, in
order to ship himself for some of the Islands, Jamaica or Barbadoes.

"I was in despair of finding the man.  However, I sent for an honest
Constable I had made use of in apprehending Kidd and his men, and sent
him with Col. Sanford's messenger to search all the Inns in town and at
the first Inn they found the mare on which Gillam had rode into town,
tied up in the yard.  The people of the Inn reported that the man who
brought her hither had alighted off her about a quarter of an hour
before, and went away without saying anything.

"I gave orders to the master of the Inn that if anybody came to look
after the mare, he should be sure to seize him, but nobody came for
her.  Next morning I summoned a Council, and we published a
Proclamation, wherein I promised a reward of 200 Pieces of Eight for
the seizing and securing of Gillam, whereupon there was the strictest
search made all that day and the next that was ever made in this part
of the world.  But we would have missed had I not been informed of one
Capt. Knott as an old Pyrate and therefore likely to know where Gillam
was conceal'd.  I sent for Knott and examined him, promising if he
would make an ingenious Confession I would not molest him.

"He seemed much disturbed but would not confess anything to purpose.  I
then sent for his wife and examined her on oath apart from her husband,
and she confessed that one who went by the name of James Kelly had
lodged several nights in her house, but for some nights past he lodged,
as she believed, in Charlestown, cross the River.  I knew that he
(Gillam) went by the name of Kelly.  Then I examined Captain Knott
again, telling him his wife had been more free and ingenious than him,
which made him believe she had told all.  And then he told me of
Francis Dole in Charlestown, and that he believed that Gillam would be
found there.

"I sent half a dozen men immediately, and Knott with 'em.  They beset
the House and searched it, but found not the man.  Two of the men went
through a field behind Dole's house and ... met a man in the dark whom
they seized at all adventure, and it happened as oddly as luckily to be
Gillam.  He had been treating two young women some few miles off in the
Country, and was returning at night to his landlord Dole's house.

"I examined him but he denied everything, even that he came with Kidd
from Madagascar, or even saw him in his life; but Capt. Davis who came
thence with Kidd's men is positive he is the man and that he went by
his true name Gillam all the while he was on the voyage with 'em.  And
Mr. Campbell, Postmaster of this town, whom I sent to treat with Kidd,
offers to swear this is the man he saw on board Kidd's sloop under the
name of Gillam.  He is the most impudent, hardened Villain I ever
saw....

"In searching Captain Knott's house a small trunk was found with some
remnants of East India Goods and a letter from Kidd's Wife to Capt.
Thomas Paine, an old pyrate living on Canonicut Island in Rhode Island
Government.  He made an affidavit to me when I was in Rhode Island that
he had received nothing from Kidd's sloop, when she lay at anchor
there, yet by Knott's deposition, he was sent with Mrs. Kidd's letter
to Paine for 24 ounces of Gold, which Kidd accordingly brought, and
Mrs. Kidd's injunction to Paine to keep all the rest that was left with
him till further notice was a plain indication that there was a good
deal of treasure still left behind in Paine's Custody.

"Therefore I posted away a messenger to Gov.  Cranston and Col. Sanford
to make a strict search of Paine's house before he could have notice.
It seems nothing was then found, but Paine has since produced 18 ounces
and odd weight of Gold, as appears by Gov. Cranston's letter, Nov. 25,
and pretends 'twas bestowed on him by Kidd, hoping that may pass as a
salve for the oath he has made.  I think it is plain he foreswore
himself.  I am of opinion he has a great deal more of Kidd's goods
still in his hands, but he is out of my Power and being in that
Government I cannot compel him to deliver up the rest...."


That "Edward Davis, Mariner," who came home with Kidd and who made the
statement already quoted concerning Gillam's chest, found himself in
trouble with the others of that crew, and the tireless Bellomont refers
to him in this fashion:

"When Capt Kidd was committed to Gaol, there was also a Pyrate
committed who goes by the name of Captain Davis, that came passenger
with Kidd from Madagascar.  I suppose him to be that Captain Davis that
Dampier and Wafer speak of, in their printed relations of Voyages, for
an extraordinary stout man; but let him be as stout as he will, here he
is a prisoner, and shall be forthcoming upon the order I receive from
England concerning Kidd and his men.

"When I was at Rhode Island there was one Palmer, a Pyrate, that was
out upon Bail, for they cannot be persuaded there to keep a Pyrate in
Gaol, they love 'em too well.  He went out with Kidd from London and
forsook him at Madagascar to go on board the _Mocha Frigate_, where he
was a considerable time, committing several Robberies with the rest of
the Pyrates in that Ship, and was brought home by Shelly of New York.

"I asked Gov. Cranston how he could answer taking bail for him, when he
had received so strict Orders from Mr. Secretary Vernon to seize and
secure Kidd and his associates with their effects.  I desired Col.
Sanford to examine Palmer on oath.  I enclose his Examination where
your Lordships may please to observe that he accuses Kidd of murdering
his Gunner, which I never heard before."



======================================================================

[Illustration: Statement of Edward Davis, who sailed home with Kidd,
concerning the landing of the treasure and goods.]

======================================================================

It may be that the "old Pyrate," Thomas Paine buried a bag of Kidd's
gold but it is much more likely that whatever had been stored with him
was turned over to that astute helpmeet, Mrs. William Kidd, for whom it
has been left in his keeping.  As for that "most impudent, hardened
Villain," James Gillam, it is unreasonable to suppose that his sea
chest was buried by the friends who took it off his hands in Delaware
Bay.  Indeed, there was no motive for putting booty underground when it
could be readily disposed of in the open market.  Bellomont complained
in one of his letters of this same eventful summer:

"There are about thirty Pyrates come lately into the East end of Nassau
Island and have a great deal of Money with them, but so cherished are
they by the Inhabitants that not a man among them is taken up.  Several
of them I hear, came with Shelly from Madagascar.  Mr. Hackshaw, one of
the Merchants in London that plotted against me, is one of the owners
of Shelley's Sloop, and Mr. De Lancey, a Frenchman at New York is
another.  I hear that Capt. Kidd dropped some Pyrates in that Island
(Madagascar).  Till there be a good Judge or two, and an honest, active
Attorney General to prosecute for the King, all my Labour to suppress
Pyracy will signify even just nothing.  When Fred Phillip's ship and
the other two come from Madagascar, which are expected every day, New
York will abound with Gold.  'Tis the most beneficial Trade, that to
Madagascar with the Pyrates, that ever was heard of, and I believe
there's more got that way than by turning Pirates and robbing.  I am
told this Shelley sold rum, which cost but 2 s. per Gallon in New York
for 50 s. at Madagascar, and a pipe of Madeira wine, which cost him 19
pounds at New York, he sold for 300 pounds.  Strong liquors and gun
powder and ball are the commodities that go off there to best
Advantage, and those four ships last summer carried thither great
quantities of things."

There is another authentic glimpse of Kidd and his men and his spoils,
as viewed by Colonel Robert Quarry,[15] Judge of the Admiralty Court
for the Province of Pennsylvania.

"There is arrived in this Government," he reported, "about 60 pirates
in a ship directly from Madagascar.  They are part of Kidd's gang, and
about 20 of them have quitted the Ship and are landed in this
Government.  About sixteen more are landed at Cape May in the
Government of West Jersey.  The rest of them are still on board the
ship at Anchor near the Cape waiting for a sloop from New York to
unload her.  She is a very rich Ship.  All her loading is rich East
India Bale Goods to a very great value, besides abundance of money.
The Captain of the Ship is one Shelley of New York and the ship belongs
to Merchants of that place.  The Goods are all purchased from the
Pirates at Madagascar which pernicious trade gives encouragement to the
Pirates to continue in those parts, having a Market for all the Goods
they plunder and rob in the Red Sea and several other parts of East
India."

Colonel Quarry caught two of these pirates and lodged them in jail at
Burlington, New Jersey, and later tucked away two others in
Philadelphia jail.  From the former two thousand pieces of eight were
taken, a neat little fortune to show that piracy was a paying business.
A few days later Colonel Quarry got wind of no other than Kidd himself
and would have caught him ahead of Bellomont had he been properly
supported.  He protested indignantly:

"Since my writing the enclosed I have by the assistance of Col. Bass,
Governor of the Jerseys, apprehended four more of the Pirates at Cape
May and might have with ease secured all the rest of them and the Ship
too, had this Government (Pennsylvania) given me the least aid or
assistance.  But they would not so much as issue a Proclamation, but on
the contrary the people have entertained the Pirates, convey'd them
from place to place, furnished them with provisions and liquors, and
given them intelligence, and sheltered them from justice.  And now the
greater part of them are conveyed away in boats to Rhode Island.  All
the persons I have employed in searching for and apprehending these
Pirates are abused and affronted and called Enemies of the Country for
disturbing and hindering honest men (as they are pleased to call the
Pirates) from bringing their money and settling amongst them....

"Since my writing this, Capt. Kidd is come in this (Delaware) Bay.  He
hath been here about ten days.  He sends his boat ashore to the Hore
Kills where he is supplied with what he wants and the people frequently
go on board him.  He is in a Sloop with about forty men with a Vast
Treasure, I hope the express which I sent to his Excellency Governor
Nicholson will be in time enough to send the man-of-war to come up with
Kidd....

"The Pirates that I brought to this Government have the liberty to
confine themselves to a tavern, which is what I expected.  The six
other Pirates that are in Burlington are at liberty, for the Quakers
there will not suffer the Government to send them to Gaol.  Thus his
Majesty may expect to be obeyed in all places where the Government is
in Quakers' hands...."



[1] Mr. F. L. Gay of Boston very kindly gave the author the use of his
valuable collection of documentary material concerning Captain Kidd,
some of which is contained in this chapter.  In addition, the author
consulted many of the original documents among the state papers in the
Public Record Office, London.

[2] Damaged.

[3] Clarke managed to clear himself and this threat was not carried out.

[4] Ms. torn.

[5] Genuine.

[6] Ms. torn.

[7] Ms. torn.

[8] Prize, or plunder.

[9] Titus Gates, the notorious informer, who revealed an alleged
"Papist plot" to massacre the English Protestants in the reign of
Charles II.  He was later denounced, pilloried, and publicly flogged
within an inch of his life.

[10] Ms. torn.

[11] Lieutenant-governor at New York.

[12] Ms. torn.

[13] Ms. torn.

[14] Ms. torn.

[15] Colonel Robert Quarry cut a rather odd figure as a prosecutor of
pirates in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.  He had been secretary to the
Governor of Carolina and assumed that office without authority from the
proprietors, at the death of Sir Richard Kyle who was appointed in 1684.

"A few months before it had been recommended that 'as the Governor will
not in all probability always reside in Charles Town, which is so near
the sea as to be in danger from a sudden invasion of Pirates,' Governor
Kyle should commissionate a particular Governor for Charles Town who
may act in his absence."  (South Carolina Historical Society
Collections.)

Governor Kyle suggested as a suitable person for this office his
secretary, Robert Quarry, and "probably this recommendation made Quarry
feel justified in assuming control when Kyle died.  So flagrant was
Quarry's encouragement of pirates, and his cupidity so notorious that
he was removed from office after two months.  Later "he went north and
was appointed Admiralty Judge for New York and Pennsylvania."  ("The
Carolina Pirates," by S. C. Hughson, Johns Hopkins University Studies.)




CHAPTER IV

CAPTAIN KIDD, HIS TRIAL, AND DEATH

As the under dog in a situation where the most powerful influences of
England conspired to blacken his name and take his life, Captain
William Kidd, even at this late day, deserves to be heard in his own
defense.  That he was unfairly tried and condemned is admitted by
various historians, who, nevertheless, have twisted or overlooked the
facts, as if Kidd were, in sooth, a legendary character.  This
blundering, careless treatment is the more surprising because Kidd was
made a political issue of such importance as to threaten the overthrow
of a Ministry and the Parliamentary censure of the King himself.  At
the height of the bitter hostility against Somers, the Whig Lord
Chancellor of William III, the Kidd affair presented itself as a ready
weapon for the use of his political foes.

"About the other patrons of Kidd the chiefs of the opposition cared
little," says Macauley.[1]  "Bellomont was far removed from the
political scene.  Romney could not, and Shrewsbury would not play a
first part.  Orford had resigned his employments.  But Somers still
held the Great Seal, still presided in the House of Lords, still had
constant access to the closet.  The retreat of his friends had left him
the sole and undisputed head of that party which had, in the late
Parliament, been a majority, and which was in the present Parliament
outnumbered indeed, disorganized and threatened, but still numerous and
respectable.  His placid courage rose higher and higher to meet the
dangers which threatened him.

"In their eagerness to displace and destroy him, they overreached
themselves.  Had they been content to accuse him of lending his
countenance, with a rashness unbecoming his high place, to an
ill-concerted scheme, that large part of mankind which judges of a plan
simply by the event would probably have thought the accusation well
founded.  But the malice which they bore to him was not to be so
satisfied.  They affected to believe that he had from the first been
aware of Kidd's character and designs.  The Great Seal had been
employed to sanction a piratical expedition.  The head of the law had
laid down a thousand pounds in the hopes of receiving tens of thousands
when his accomplices should return laden with the spoils of ruined
merchants.  It was fortunate for the Chancellor that the calumnies of
which he was object were too atrocious to be mischievous.

"And now the time had come at which the hoarded ill-humor of six months
was at liberty to explode.  On the sixteenth of November the House
met....  There were loud complaints that the events of the preceding
session had been misrepresented to the public, that emissaries of the
Court, in every part of the kingdom, declaimed against the absurd
jealousies or still more absurd parsimony which had refused to his
Majesty the means of keeping up such an army as might secure the
country against invasion.  Angry resolutions were passed, declaring it
to be the opinion of the House that the best way to establish entire
confidence between the King and the Estates would be to put a brand on
those evil advisers who had dared to breathe in the royal ear calumnies
against a faithful Parliament.

"An address founded on these resolutions was voted; many thought that a
violent rupture was inevitable.  But William returned an answer so
prudent and gentle that malice itself could not prolong the dispute.
By this time, indeed, a new dispute had begun.  The address had
scarcely been moved when the House called for copies of the papers
relating to Kidd's expedition.  Somers, conscious of his innocence,
knew that it was wise as well as right and resolved that there should
be no concealment.

"Howe raved like a maniac.  'What is to become of the country,
plundered by land, plundered by sea?  Our rulers have laid hold of our
lands, our woods, our mines, our money.  And all this is not enough.
We cannot send a cargo to the farthest ends of the earth, but they must
send a gang of thieves after it.'  Harley and Seymour tried to carry a
vote of censure without giving the House time to read the papers.  But
the general feeling was strongly for a short delay.  At length on the
sixth of December, the subject was considered in a committee of the
whole House.  Shower undertook to prove that the letters patent to
which Somers had put the Great Seal were illegal.  Cowper replied to
him with immense applause, and seems to have completely refuted him.

"At length, after a debate which lasted from mid-day till nine at
night, and in which all the leading members took part, the committee
divided on the question that the letters patent were dishonorable to
the King, inconsistent with the laws of nations, contrary to the
statutes of the realm, and destructive of property and trade.  The
Chancellor's enemies had felt confident of victory, and made the
resolution so strong in order that it might be impossible for him to
retain the Great Seal.  They soon found that it would have been wise to
propose a gentler censure.  Great numbers of their adherents, convinced
by Cowper's arguments, or unwilling to put a cruel stigma on a man of
whose genius and accomplishments the nation was proud, stole away
before the doors were closed.  To the general astonishment, there were
only one hundred and thirty-three Ayes to one hundred and eighty-nine
Noes.  That the city of London did not consider Somers as the
destroyer, and his enemies as the protectors of trade, was proved on
the following morning by the most unequivocal of signs.  As soon as the
news of the triumph reached the Royal Exchange, the price of stocks
went up."

There is a very rare pamphlet which illuminates the matter in much more
detail.  It was written and published as a defense of Bellomont and his
partners and the very length, elaboration, and heat its argument shows
how furiously the political pot was boiling while Kidd was imprisoned
in London awaiting his trial.  This _ex parte_ production is entitled
"A Full Account of the Actions of the Late Famous Pyrate, Captain Kidd,
With the Proceedings against Him and a Vindication of the Right
Honourable Richard, Earl of Bellomont, Lord Caloony, late Governor of
New England, and other Honourable Persons from the Unjust Reflection;
Cast upon Them.  By a Person of Quality."[2]

It is herein recorded that the arguments to support the question moved
in Parliament were:

"1--That by law the King could not grant the Goods of Pirates, at
least, not before conviction.

"2--That the Grant was extravagant, for all Goods of Pirates, taken
with or by any persons in any part of the world, were granted away.

"3--Not only the Goods of the Pirates, but all Goods taken with them
were granted, which was illegal, because tho' the Goods were taken by
Pirates, the rightful Owners have still a Title to them, Piracy working
no change of Property.

"5--By this Grant a great Hardship was put upon the Merchants whose
Goods might be taken with the Pirates, for they had nowhere to go for
Justice.  They could not hope for it in the Chancery, the Lord
Chancellor being interested; nor at the Board of Admiralty where the
Earl of Orford presided; nor from the King, all access to him being by
the Duke of Shrewsbury; nor in the Plantations where the Earl of
Bellomont was.  So the only Judge who the Pirates were, and what goods
were theirs, was Captain Kidd himself."

Whatsoever may have been wrong with his contract or his commissions,
and Parliament sustained them by vote as already mentioned, Captain
Kidd cannot be held blameworthy on this score.  And it is absurd to
call him a premeditated pirate who sailed from Plymouth with evil
purpose in his heart.  His credentials and endorsements, his record as
a shipmaster, and his repute at home, cannot be set aside.  They speak
for themselves.  Nor is it possible to reconcile the character of the
man, as he was known by his deeds up to that time, with the charges
laid against him.

It is worth noting that the complaints made against his conduct in the
waters of the Far East came from the East India Company which denounced
and proclaimed him as a pirate with a price on his head.  It was a case
of the pot calling the kettle black.  Although the House of Commons had
decided five years before that the old Company should no longer have a
monopoly of English trade in Asiatic seas, the merchants of London or
Bristol dared not fit out ventures to voyage beyond the Cape of Good
Hope, and found it necessary to send their goods in the ships that flew
the flag of India House.  The private trader still ran grave of being
treated as a smuggler, if not as a pirate.  "He might, indeed, if he
was wronged, apply for redress to the tribunals of his country.  But
years must elapse before his cause could be heard; his witnesses must
be conveyed over fifteen thousand miles of sea; and in the meantime he
was a ruined man."[3]

This powerful corporation which ruled the Eastern seas as it pleased,
confiscating the ships and goods of private traders, accused Kidd of
seizing two ships with their cargoes which belonged to the Great Mogul,
and of several petty depredations hardly to be classed as piracy.  The
case against him was built up around the two vessels known as the
_November_ and the _Quedah Merchant_.  His defense was that on board
these prizes he had found French papers, or safe conduct passes made
out in the name of the King of France and issued by the French East
India Company.  He therefore took the ships as lawful commerce of the
enemy.

The crews of such trading craft as these comprised men of many nations,
Arabs, Lascars, Portuguese, French, Dutch, English, Armenian, and
Heaven knows what else.  The nationality of the skipper, the mate, the
supercargo, or the foremast hands had nothing to do with the ownership
of the vessel, or the flag under which she was registered, or
chartered.  The papers found in her cabin determined whether or not she
should be viewed as a prize of war, or permitted to go on her way.  In
order to protect the ship as far as possible, it was not unusual for
the master to obtain two sets of papers, to be used as occasion might
require, and it is easily possible that the _Quedah Merchant_, trading
with the East India Company, may have taken out French papers, in order
to deceive any French privateer or cruiser that might be encountered.
Nor did the agents of the East India Company see anything wrong in
resorting to such subterfuges.

The corner stone of Kidd's defense and justification was these two
French passes, which precious documents he had brought home with him,
and it was admitted even by his enemies that the production of them as
evidence would go far to clear him of the charges of piracy.  That they
were in his possession when he landed in New England and that Bellomont
sent them to the Lords of Plantations in London is stated in a letter
quoted in the preceding chapter.  The documents then disappeared, their
very existence was denied, and Kidd was called a liar to his face, and
his memory damned by historians writing later, for trying to save his
neck by means of evidence which he was powerless to exhibit.

It would appear that these papers were not produced in court because it
had been determined that Kidd should be found guilty as a necessary
scapegoat.  But he told the truth about the French passes, and after
remaining among the state papers for more than two centuries, the
original of one of them, that found by him aboard the _Quedah
Merchant_, was recently discovered in the Public Record Office by the
author of this book, and it is herewith photographed in _fac simile_.
Its purport has been translated as follows:


FROM THE KING.

WE, FRANCOIS MARTIN ESQUIRE, COUNCILLOR OF THE ROYAL DIRECTOR, Minister
of Commerce for the Royal Company of France in the Kingdom of Bengal,
the Coast of Coramandel, and other (dependencies).  To all those who
will see these presents, Greetings:

The following, _Coja Quanesse, Coja Jacob, Armenian; Nacodas_, of the
ship _Cara Merchant_, which the Armenian merchant Agapiris Kalender has
freighted in Surate from Cohergy ... having declared to us that before
their departure from Surate they had taken a passport from the Company
which they have presented to us to be dated from the first of January,
1697, signed _Martin_ and subscribed _de Grangemont_; that they feared
to be molested during the voyage which they had to make from this port
to Surate, and alleging that the aforementioned passport is no longer
valid, and that for this reason they begged of us urgently to have
another sent to them;--For these reasons we recommend and enjoin upon
all those under the authority of the Company; we beg the Chiefs of
Squadrons and Commanders of Vessels of His Majesty: and we request all
the friends and allies of the Crown in nowise to retard the voyage and
to render all possible aid and comfort, promising on a similar occasion
to do likewise.  In testimony of which we have signed these presents,
and caused them to be countersigned by the Secretary of the Company,
and the seal of his arms placed thereon.

MARTIN.

(Dated Jan. 16, 1698.)


======================================================================

[Illustration: The French pass or safe conduct paper found by Kidd in
the ship _Quedah Merchant_.  This document, which was suppressed by the
prosecution, is evidence that the prize was a lawful capture.  Kidd
vainly begged at his trial that this was another French pass be
produced as evidence in his favor.]

======================================================================

It is reasonable to assume that the _Cara Merchant_ of the passport, is
intended to designate the ship in which the document was found by Kidd.
In various reports of the episode, the name of the vessel was spelled
_Quidah, Quedah, Queda_ and _Quedagh_.  The word is taken from the name
of a small native state of the Malay Peninsula, and even to-day it is
set down in various ways, as _Quedah, Kedda_, or _Kedah_.  Other
circumstances confirm this supposition and go far to prove that the
ship was a lawful prize for an English privateer.  During the period
between the Revolution and the War of 1812, England confiscated many
American merchant vessels in the West Indies under pretexts not a whit
more convincing than Kidd's excuse for snapping up the _Quedah
Merchant_.

What Kidd himself had to say about this affair is told in his narrative
of the voyage as he related it during his preliminary examination while
under arrest in Boston.  It runs as follows:


A Narrative of the Voyage of Capt. William Kidd, Commander of the
_Adventure Galley_, from London to the East Indies.

That the Journal of the said Capt. Kidd being violently taken from him
in the Port of St. Maries in Madagascar; and his life many times being
threatened to be taken away from him by 97 of his men that deserted him
there, he cannot give that exact Account he otherwise would have done,
but as far as his memory will serve, it is as follows, Vizt:

That the said _Adventure Galley_ was launched in Castles Yard at
Deptford about the 4th. day of December, 1695, and about the latter end
of February the said Galley came to ye buoy in the Nore, and about the
first day of March following, his men were pressed from him for the
Fleet which caused him to stay there about 19 days, and then sailed for
the Downs and arrived there about the 8th or 10th day of April 1696,
and sailed thence to Plymouth and on the 23rd. day of the said month of
April he sailed from Plymouth on his intended Voyage.  And some time in
the month of May met with a small French Vessel with Salt and Fishing
tackle on board, bound for Newfoundland, which he took and made prize
of and carried the same into New York about the 4th day of July where
she was condemned as lawful prize, and the produce whereof purchased
Provisions for the said Galley for her further intended Voyage.

That about the 6th. day of September, 1696, the said Capt. Kidd sailed
for the Madeiras in company with one Joyner, Master of a Brigantine
belonging to Bermuda, and arrived there about the 8th. day of October
following, and thence to Bonavista where they arrived about the 19th.
of the said month and took in some Salt and stay'd three or four days
and sailed thence to St. Jago and arrived there the 24th, of the said
month, where he took in some water and stay'd about 8 or 9 days, and
thence sailed for the Cape of Good Hope and in the Latitude of 32, on
the 12th day of December, 1696, met with four English men of war
whereof Capt. Warren was Commodore and sailed a week in their company,
and then parted and sailed to Telere, a port in the Island of
Madagascar.

And being there about the 29th day of January, there came in a Sloop
belonging to Barbadoes loaded with Rum, Sugar, Powder, and Shott, one
French, Master, and Mr. Hatton and Mr. John Batt, merchants, and the
said Hatton came on board the said _Galley_ and was suddenly taken ill
and died in the Cabbin.  And about the latter end of February sailed
for the Island of Johanna, and the said Sloop keeping company, and
arrived thereabout the 18th day of March, where he found four East
India merchantmen, outward bound, and watered there all together and
stay'd about four days, and from thence about the 22nd day of March
sailed for Mehila, an Island ten Leagues distant from Johanna, where he
arrived the next morning, and there careened the said _Galley, and
about fifty men died there in a week's time_.[4]

And about the 25th day of April, 1697, set sail for the coast of India,
and came upon the coast of Malabar, in the beginning of the month of
September, and went into Carawar upon that coast about the middle of
the same month, and watered there.  The Gentlemen of the English
Factory gave the Narrator an account that the Portugese were fitting
out two men of war to take him, and advised him to set out to sea, and
to take care of himself from them, and immediately he set sail
therefrom about the 22nd of the said month of September.  And the next
morning, about break of day, saw the said two men-of-war standing for
the said _Galley_, and they spoke with him and asked him whence he was,
who replied from London, and they returned answer from Goa, and so
parted, wishing each other a good Voyage.

And making still along the coast, the Commodore of the said men-of-war
kept dogging the said _Galley_ at night, waiting an opportunity to
board the same, and in the morning without speaking a word fired six
great guns at the _Galley_, some whereof went through her and wounded
four of his men.  And therefore he fired upon him again, and the fight
continued all day, and the Narrator had eleven men wounded.  The other
Portugese men of war lay some distance off, and could not come up with
the _Galley_, being calm, else would have likewise assaulted the same.
The said fight was sharp and the said Portugese left the said Galley
with such satisfaction that the Narrator believes no Portugese will
ever attack the King's Colours again, in that part of the World
especially.

Afterwards continued upon the said coast till the beginning of the
month of November 1697 cruising upon the Cape of Cameroon for Pyrates
that frequent that coast.  Then he met with Capt. How in the _Loyal
Captain_, a Dutch Ship belonging to Madras, bound to Surat whom he
examined and finding his pass good, designed freely to let her pass
about her affairs.  But having two Dutchmen on board, they told the
Narrator's men that they had divers Greeks and Armenians on board who
had divers precious Stones and other rich goods, which caused his men
to be very mutinous, and they got up their Arms, and swore they would
take the Ship.  The Narrator told them the small arms belonged to the
_Galley_, and that he was not come to take any Englishmen or lawful
Traders, and that if they attempted any such thing, they should never
come on board the _Galley_ again, nor have the boat or small arms, for
he had no Commission to take any but the King's Enemies and Pyrates and
that he would attack them with the _Galley_ and drive them into Bombay,
(the other Vessel being a Merchantman, and having no guns, they might
easily have done it with a few hands).

With all the arguments and menaces he could use, he could scarce
restrain them from their unlawful design, but at last prevail'd and
with much ado got him clear and let him go about his business.  All of
which Captain How will attest if living.

And about the 18th. or 19th day of the said month of November met with
a Moors' Ship of about 200 Tons coming from Surat, bound to the Coast
of Malabar, loaded with two horses, Sugar and Cotton, having about 40
Moors on board with a Dutch Pylot, Boatswain, and Gunner, which said
Ship the Narrator hailed, and commanded (the Master) on board and with
him came 8 or 9 Moors and the said three Dutchmen, who declared it was
a Moors' {109} ship, and he (the Narrator) demanding their Pass from
Surat which they showed and the same was a French Pass which he
believed was showed by mistake, for the Pylot swore by Sacrament she
was a Prize and staid on board the _Galley_ and would not return again
on board the Moors' Ship but went in the _Galley_ to the port of St.
Maries.

And that about the first day of February following, upon the same
coast, under French Colours with a designe to decoy, met a Bengali
merchantman[5] belonging to Surat, of the burthen of 4 or 500 tons, 10
guns, and he commanded the master on board, and a Frenchman, Inhabitant
of Surat and belonging to the French Factory there and Gunner of said
ship, came on board as Master, and when he came on board the Narrator
caused the English Colours to be hoysted, and the said Master was
surprised, and said "You are all English," and asked which was the
Captain, whom when he (the Frenchman) saw, he said, "Here is a good
prize" and delivered him the French pass.

And that with the said two Prizes, he (the Narrator) sailed for the
Port of St. Maries in Madagascar, and sailing thither the _Galley_ was
so leaky that they feared she would have sunk every hour, and it
required eight men every two glasses to keep her free, and they were
forced to woold her round with Cables to keep her together, and with
much ado carried her into port....  And about the 6th day of May, the
lesser Prize was haled into the careening island or key (the other not
having arrived), and ransacked and sunk by the mutinous men who
threatened the Narrator and the men that would not join with them, to
burn and sink the other Ship that they might not go home and tell the
news.

And that when he arrived in the said port, there was a Pyrate Ship,
called the _Moca Frigat_, at an Anchor, Robert Culliford, Commander
thereof, who with his men left the same and ran into the woods, and the
Narrator proposed to his men to take the same, having sufficient power
and authority so to do, but the mutinous crew told him if he offered
the same they would rather fire two guns into him than one into the
other; and thereupon 97 deserted and went into the _Moca Frigat_, and
sent into the woods for the said Pyrates and brought the said Culliford
and his men on board again.  And all the time she (the _Moca Frigat_)
staid in the said Port, which was for the space of 4 or 5 days, the
said deserters, sometimes in great numbers, came on board the
_Adventure Galley_ and her prize and carried away the great gun,
powder, shot, arms, sails, anchors, etc., and what they pleased, and
threatened several times to murder the Narrator (as he was informed and
advised to take care of himself), which they designed in the night to
effect, but was prevented by his locking himself in his Cabbin and
securing himself with barricading the same with bales of Goods, and
having about forty Small arms besides Pistols ready charged, kept them
out.  Their wickedness was so great that after they had plundered and
ransacked sufficiently, they went four miles off to one Edward Welche's
house where his (the Narrator's) chest was lodged, and broke it open
and took out 10 ounces of gold, forty pounds of plate, 370 pieces of
eight, the Narrator's Journal, and a great many papers that belonged to
him, and to the people of New Yorke that fitted him out.

That about the 15th day of June the _Moca Frigate_ went away, being
manned with about 130 men and forty guns, bound out to take all
Nations.  Then it was that the Narrator was left with only about 13
men, so that the Moors he had to pump and keep the _Adventure Galley_
above water being carried away, she sank in the Harbour, and the
Narrator with the said Thirteen men went on board of the _Adventure's_
Prize where he was forced to stay five months for a fair wind.  In the
meantime some Passengers presented themselves that were bound for these
parts, which he took on board to help to bring the said _Adventure's_
Prize[6] home.

That about the beginning of April 1699, the Narrator arrived at
Anguilla in the West Indies and sent his boat on shore where his men
heard the News that he and his People were proclaimed Pirates, which
put them into such a Consternation that they sought all opportunities
to run the Ship on shore upon some reefs or shoal, fearing the Narrator
should carry them into some English port.

From Anguilla, they came to St. Thomas where his brother-in-law, Samuel
Bradley, was put on shore, being sick, and five more went away and
deserted him.  There he heard the same News, that the Narrator and his
Company were proclaimed Pirates, which incensed the people more and
more.  From St. Thomas set sail for Mona, an Island between Hispaniola
and Porto Rico, where they met with a Sloop called the _St. Anthony_,
bound for Antigua from Curacoa, Mr. Henry Bolton, Merchant, and Samuel
Wood, Master.  The men on board then swore they would bring the ship no
farther.  The Narrator then sent the said Sloop, _St. Anthony_, to
Curacoa for canvas to make sails for the Prize, she being not able to
proceed, and she returned in 10 days, and after the canvas came he
could not persuade the men to carry her for New England.

Six of the men went and carried their Chests and things on board of two
Dutch Sloops bound for Curacoa, and would not so much as heel the
Vessel or do anything.  The remainder of the men, not being able to
bring the _Adventure_ Prize to Boston, the Narrator secured her in a
good safe harbour in some part of Hispaniola and left her in the
possession of M. Henry Bolton of Antigua, Merchant, and the Master, and
three of the old men, and 15 or 16 of the men that belonged to the said
sloop, _St. Anthony_, and a Brigantine belonging to one Burt of Curacoa.

That the Narrator bought the said Sloop, _St. Anthony_, of Mr. Bolton,
for the Owners' account, after he had given directions to the said
Bolton to be careful of the Ship and lading and persuaded him to stay
three months till he returned.  And he then made the best of his way
for New York where he heard the Earl of Bellomont was, who was
principally concerned in the _Adventure Galley_, and hearing his
Lordship was at Boston, came thither and has now been 45 days from the
said Ship.  Further, the Narrator saith that the said ship was left at
St. Katharine on the southeast part of Hispaniola, about three Leagues
to leeward of the westerly end of Savano.  Whilst he lay at Hispaniola
he traded with Mr. Henry Bolton of Antigua and Mr. William Burt of
Curacoa, Merchants, to the value of Eleven Thousand Two Hundred Pieces
of Eight, whereof he received the Sloop _Antonio_ at 3000 Ps. of eight,
and Four Thousand Two Hundred Ps. of Eight in Bills of Lading drawn by
Bolton and Burt upon Messers. Gabriel and Lemont, Merchants, in
Curacoa, made payable to Mr. Burt who went himself to Curacoa, and the
value of Four Thousand Pieces of Eight more in dust and bar gold.
Which gold, with some more traded for at Madagascar, being Fifty pounds
weight or upwards in quantity, the Narrator left in custody of Mr.
Gardiner of Gardiner's Island, near the eastern end of Long Island,
fearing to bring it about by sea.

It is made up in a bagg put into a little box, lockt and nailed, corded
about and sealed.  The Narrator saith he took no receipt for it of Mr.
Gardiner.  The gold that was seized at Mr. Campbell's, the Narrator
traded for at Madagascar, with what came out of the _Galley_.  He saith
that he carried in the _Adventure Galley_ from New York 154 men,
seventy whereof came out of England with him.

Some of his Sloop's company put two bails of Goods on store at
Gardiner's Island, being their own property.  The Narrator delivered a
chest of Goods, Vizt; Muslins, Latches, Romals, and flowered silk unto
Mr. Gardiner of Gardiner's Island to be kept there for him.  _He put no
goods on shore anywhere else_.  Several of his company landed their
Chests and other goods at several places.

Further saith he delivered a small bail of coarse callicoes unto a
Sloopman of Rhode Island that he had employed there.  The Gold seized
at Mr. Campbell's, the Narrator intended for presents to some that he
expected to do him kindness.

Some of his company put their Chests and bails on board a New York
Sloop lying at Gardiner's Island.

WM. KIDD.

  Presented and taken _die praedict_
  before his Exc'y and Council
    Addington, Sec'y.


More than a year after Kidd had been carried to England with twelve of
his crew, he was arraigned for trial at the Old Bailey.  Meantime Lord
Bellomont had died in Boston.  Trials for piracy were common enough,
but this accused shipmaster was confronted by such an array of titled
big-wigs and court officials as would have been sufficient to try the
Lord Chancellor himself.  For the government, the Lord Chief Baron, Sir
Edward Ward, presided, and with him sat Sir Henry Hatsell, Baron of the
Exchequer; Sir Salathiel Lovell, the Recorder of London; Sir John
Turton and Sir Henry Gould, Justices of the King's Bench, and Sir John
Powell, a Justice of the Common Pleas.  As counsel for the prosecution,
there was the Solicitor General, Dr. Oxenden; Mr. Knapp, Mr. Coniers,
and Mr. Campbell.

For Captain William Kidd, there was no one.  By the law of England at
that time, a prisoner tried on a criminal charge could employ no
counsel and was permitted to have no legal advice, except only when a
point of law was directly involved.  Kidd had been denied all chance to
muster witnesses or assemble documents, and, at that, the court was so
fearful of failing to prove the charges of piracy that it was decided
to try him first for killing his gunner, William Moore, and convicting
him of murder.  He would be as conveniently dead if hanged for the one
crime as for the other.

Now, it is not impossible that Kidd had clean forgotten that trifling
episode of William Moore.  For a commander to knock down a seaman
guilty of disrespect or disobedience was as commonplace as eating.  The
offender was lucky if he got off no worse.  Discipline in the naval and
merchant services was barbarously severe.  Sailors died of flogging or
keelhauling, or of being triced up by the thumbs for the most trifling
misdemeanors.  As for Moore, he was a mutineer, and an insolent rogue
besides, who had stirred up trouble in the crew, and nothing would have
been said to any other skipper than Kidd for shooting him or running
him through.  However, let the testimony tell its own story.

After the Grand Jury had returned the bill of indictment for murder,
the Clerk of Arraignment said:

"William Kidd, hold up thy hand."

With a pluck and persistence which must have had a certain pathetic
dignity, Kidd began to object.

"May it please your Lordship, I desire you to permit me to have
counsel."

_The Recorder_.  "What would you have counsel for?"

Kidd.  "My Lord, I have some matters of law relating to the indictment,
and I desire I may have counsel to speak to it."

_Dr. Oxenden_.  "What matter of law can you have?"

_Clerk of Arraignment_.  "How does he know what he is charged with?  I
have not told him."

_The Recorder_.  "You must let the Court know what these matters of law
are before you can have counsel assigned you."

_Kidd_.  "They be matters of law, my Lord."

_The Recorder_.  "Mr. Kidd, do you know what you mean by matters of
law?"

_Kidd_.  "I know what I mean.  I desire to put off my trial as long as
I can, till I can get my evidence ready."

_The Recorder_: "Mr. Kidd, you had best mention the matter of law you
would insist on."

_Dr. Oxenden_.  "It cannot be matter of law to put off your trial, but
matter of fact."

_Kidd_.  "I desire your Lordship's favor.  I desire that Dr. Oldish and
Mr. Lemmon here be heard as to my case (indicating lawyers present in
court)."

_Clerk of Arraignment_.  "What can he have counsel for before he has
pleaded?"

_The Recorder_.  "Mr. Kidd, the Court tells you it shall be heard what
you have to say when you have pleaded to your indictment.  If you plead
to it, if you will, you may assign matter of law, if you have any, but
then you must let the Court know what you would insist on."

_Kidd_.  "I beg your Lordship's patience, till I can procure my papers.
I had a couple of French passes which I must make use of, in order to
my justification."

_The Recorder_.  "This is not matter of law.  You have had long notice
of your trial, and might have prepared for it.  How long have you had
notice of your trial?"

_Kidd_.  "A matter of a fortnight."

_Dr. Oxenden_.  "Can you tell the names of any persons that you would
make use of in your defense?"

_Kidd_.  "I sent for them, but I could not have them."

_Dr. Oxenden_.  "Where were they then?"

_Kidd_.  "I brought them to my Lord Bellomont in New England."

_The Recorder_.  "What were their names?  You cannot tell without book.
Mr. Kidd, the Court sees no reason to put off your trial, therefore you
must plead."

_Clerk of Arraignment_.  "William Kidd, hold up thy hand."

_Kidd_.  "I beg your Lordship I may have counsel admitted, and that my
trial may be put off, I am not really prepared for it."

_The Recorder_.  "Nor never will, if you could help it."

_Dr. Oxenden_.  "Mr. Kidd, you have had reasonable notice, and you know
you must be tried, and therefore you cannot plead you are not ready."

_Kidd_.  "If your Lordships permit those papers to be read, they will
justify me.  I desire my counsel may be heard."

_Mr. Coniers_.  "We admit of no counsel for him."

_The Recorder_.  "There is no issue joined, and therefore there can be
no counsel assigned.  Mr. Kidd, you must plead."

_Kidd_.  "I cannot plead till I have those papers that I insisted upon."

_Mr. Lemmon_.  "He ought to have his papers delivered to him, because
they are very material for his defense.  He has endeavored to have
them, but could not get them."

_Mr. Coniers_.  "You are not to appear for anyone, (Mr. Lemmon) till he
pleads, and that the Court assigns you for his counsel."

_The Recorder_.  "They would only put off the trial."

_Mr. Coniers_.  "He must plead to the indictment."

_Clerk of Arraignment_.  "Make silence."

_Kidd_.  "My papers are all seized, and I cannot make my defense
without them.  I desire my trial may be put off till I can have them."

_The Recorder_.  "The Court is of opinion that they ought not to stay
for all your evidence; it may be they will never come.  You must plead;
and then if you can satisfy the Court that there is a reason to put off
the trial, you may."

_Kidd_.  "My Lord, I have business in law, and I desire counsel."

_The Recorder_.  "The course of Courts is, when you have pleaded, the
matter of trial is next; if you can then show there is cause to put off
the trial, you may, but now the matter is to plead."

_Kidd_.  "It is a hard case when all these things shall be kept from
me, and I am forced to plead."

_The Recorder_.  "If he will not plead, there must be judgment."

_Kidd_.  "Would you have me plead and not have my vindication by me?"

_Clerk of Arraignment_.  "Will you plead to the indictment?"

_Kidd_.  "I would beg that I may have my papers for my vindication."

It is very obvious that up to this point Kidd was concerned only with
the charges of piracy, and attached no importance to the fact that he
had been indicted for the murder of his gunner.  Regarding the matter
of the French passes, Kidd was desperately in earnest.  He knew their
importance, nor was he begging for them as a subterfuge to gain time.
He had been employed as a privateering commander against the French in
the West Indies and on the New England coast, as the documents of the
Provincial Government have already shown.  It is fair to assume that he
knew the rules of the game and the kind of papers necessary to make a
prize a lawful capture by the terms of the English privateering
commission which he held.  But his efforts to introduce this evidence
which had been secured by Bellomont and forwarded to the authorities in
London, were of no avail.  Compelled to plead to the indictment for
murder, Kidd swore that he was not guilty, and the trial then proceeded
under the direction of Lord Chief Baron Ward.  Dr. Oldish, who sought
to be assigned, with Mr. Lemmon, as counsel for the prisoner, was not
to be diverted from the main issue, and he boldly struck in.

"My Lord, it is very fit his trial should be delayed for some time
because he wants some papers very necessary for his defense.  It is
very true he is charged with piracies in several ships, but they had
French passes when the seizure was made.  Now, if there were French
passes, it was a lawful seizure."

_Mr. Justice Powell_.  "Have you those passes?"

_Kidd_.  "They were taken from me by my Lord Bellomont, and these
passes would be my defense."

_Dr. Oldish_.  "If those ships that he took had French passes, there
was just cause of seizure, and it will excuse him from piracy."

_Kidd_.  "They were taken from me by my Lord Bellomont and those passes
show there was just cause of seizure.  That we will prove as clear as
the day."

_The Lord Chief Baron_.  "What ship was that which had the French
passes?"

_Mr. Lemmon_.  "The same he was in; the same he is indicted for."

_Clerk of Arraignment_.  "Let all stand aside but Captain Kidd.
William Kidd, you are now to be tried on the Bill of Murder; the jury
is going to be sworn.  If you have any cause of exception, you may
speak to them as they come to the Book."

_Kidd_.  "I challenge none.  I know nothing to the contrary but they
are honest men."

The first witness for the Crown was Joseph Palmer, of the _Adventure
Galley_ (who had been captured by Bellomont in Rhode Island and who had
informed him of the incident of the death of Moore, the gunner).  He
testified as follows:

"About a fortnight before this accident fell out, Captain Kidd met with
a ship on that coast (Malabar) that was called the _Loyal Captain_.
And about a fortnight after this, the gunner was grinding a chisel
aboard the _Adventure_, on the high seas, near the coast of Malabar in
the East Indies."

_Mr. Coniers_.  "What was the gunner's name!"

_Palmer_.  "William Moore.  And Captain Kidd came and walked on the
deck, and walked by this Moore, and when he came to him, says, 'How
could you have put me in a way to take this ship (_Loyal Captain_) and
been clear?'  'Sir,' says William Moore, 'I never spoke such a word,
nor thought such a thing.'  Upon which Captain Kidd called him a lousie
dog.  And says William Moore, 'If I am a lousie dog, you have made me
so.  You have brought me to ruin and many more.'  Upon him saying this,
says Captain Kidd, 'Have I ruined you, ye dog?' and took a bucket bound
with iron hoops and struck him on the right side of the head, of which
he died next day."

_Mr. Coniers_.  "Tell my Lord what passed next after the blow."

_Palmer_.  "He was let down the gun-room, and the gunner said
'Farewell, Farewell!  Captain Kidd has given me my last.'  And Captain
Kidd stood on the deck and said, 'You're a villain.'"

Robert Bradingham, who had been the surgeon of the _Adventure Galley_,
then testified that the wound was small but that the gunner's skull had
been fractured.

_Mr. Cooper_.  "Had you any discourse with Captain Kidd after this,
about the man's death?"

_Bradingham_.  "Some time after this, about two months, by the coast of
Malabar, Captain Kidd said, 'I do not care so much for the death of my
gunner, as for other passages of my voyage, for I have good friends in
England, who will bring me off for that.'"

With this, the prosecution rested, and the Lord Chief Baron addressed
Kidd.

"Then you may make your defense.  You are charged with murder, and you
have heard the evidence that has been given.  What have you to say for
yourself?"

_Kidd_.  "I have evidence to prove it is no such thing, if they may be
admitted to come hither.  My Lord, I will tell you what the case was.
I was coming up within a league of the Dutchman (the _Loyal Captain_),
and some of my men were making a mutiny about taking her, and my gunner
told the people he could put the captain in a way to take the ship and
be safe.  Says I, 'How will you do that?'  The gunner answered, 'We
will get the captain and men aboard.'  'And what then?'  'We will go
aboard the ship and plunder her and we will have it under their hands
that we did not take her.'  Says I, 'This is Judas-like.  I dare not do
such a thing.'  Says he, '_We_ may do it.  We are beggars already.'
'Why,' says I, 'may we take the ship because we are poor?' Upon this a
mutiny arose, so I took up a bucket and just throwed it at him, and
said 'You are a rogue to make such a notion.'  This I can prove, my
Lord."

Thereupon Kidd called Abel Owens, one of his sailors, and asked him:

"Can you tell which way this bucket was thrown?"

_Mr. Justice Powell_ (to Owens).  "What was the provocation for
throwing the bucket?"

_Owens_.  "I was in the cook-room, and hearing some difference on the
deck, I came out, and the gunner was grinding a chisel on the
grind-stone, and the captain and he had some words, and the gunner said
to the captain, 'You have brought us to ruin, and we are desolate.'
'And,' says he, (the captain) 'have I brought you to ruin?  I have not
brought you to ruin.  I have not done an ill thing to ruin you; you are
a saucy fellow to give me these words.'  And then he took up the
bucket, and did give him the blow."

_Kidd_.  "Was there a mutiny among the men?"

_Owens_.  "Yes, and the bigger part was for taking the ship, and the
captain said, 'You that will take the Dutchman, you are the strongest,
you may do what you please.  If you will take her, you may take her,
but if you go from aboard here, you shall never come aboard again.'"

_The Lord Chief Baron_.  "When was this mutiny you speak of?"

_Owens_.  "When we were at sea, about a month before this man's death."

_Kidd_.  "Call Richard Barlicorn."

(Barlicorn was an apprentice who has been mentioned in the inventory of
the Sloop _San Antonio_.)

_Kidd_.  "What was the reason the blow was given to the gunner?"

Barlicorn.  "At first, when you met with the ship (_Loyal Captain_)
there was a mutiny, and two or three of the Dutchmen came aboard, and
some said she was a rich vessel, and they would take her.  And the
captain (Kidd) said, 'No, I will not take her,' and there was a mutiny
in the ship, and the men said, 'If you will not, we will.'  And he
said, 'If you have a mind, you may, but they that will not, come along
with me.'"

_Kidd_.  "Do you think William Moore was one of those that was for
taking her?"

_Barlicorn_.  "Yes.  And William Moore lay sick a great while before
this blow was given, and the doctor said when he visited him, that this
blow was not the cause of his death."

_The Lord Chief Baron_.  "Then they must be confronted.  Do you hear,
Bradingham, what he says?"

_Bradingham_.  "I deny this."

As for this surgeon, Kidd swore that he had been a drunken, useless
idler who would lay in the hold for weeks at a time.  Seaman Hugh
Parrott was then called and asked by Kidd:

"Do you know the reason why I struck Moore?"

_Parrott_.  "Yes, because you did not take the _Loyal Captain_, whereof
Captain How was commander."

_The Lord Chief Baron_.  "Was that the reason that he struck Moore,
because this ship was not taken?"

_Parrott_.  "I shall tell you how this happened, to the best of my
knowledge.  My commander fortuned to come up with this Captain How's
ship and some were for taking her, and some not.  And afterwards there
was a little sort of mutiny, and some rose in arms, the greater part;
and they said they would take the ship.  And the commander was not for
it, and so they resolved to go away in the boat and take her.  Captain
Kidd said, 'If you desert my ship, you shall never come aboard again,
and I will force you into Bombay, and I will carry you before some of
the Council there.'  Inasmuch that my commander stilled them again and
they remained on board.  And about a fortnight afterwards, there passed
some words between this William Moore and my commander, and then, says
he (Moore), 'Captain, I could have put you in a way to have taken this
ship and been never the worse for it.'  He says, (Kidd), 'Would you
have had me take this ship?  I cannot answer it.  They are our
friends,' and with that I went off the deck, and I understood
afterwards the blow was given, but how I cannot tell."

_Kidd_.  "I have no more to say, but I had all the provocation in the
world given me.  I had no design to kill him.  I had no malice or
spleen against him."

The Lord Chief Baron.  "That must be left to the jury to consider the
evidence that has been given.  You make out no such matter."

_Kidd_.  "It was not designedly done, but in my passion, for which I am
heartily sorry."

Kidd was permitted to introduce no evidence as to his previous good
reputation, and the Court concluded that it had heard enough.  Lord
Chief Baron Ward thereupon delivered himself of an exceedingly adverse
charge to the jury, virtually instructing them to find the prisoner
guilty of murder, which was promptly done.  Having made sure of sending
him to Execution Dock, the Court then proceeded to try him for piracy,
which seems to have been a superfluous and unnecessary pother.  Kidd
declared, when this second trial began:

"It is vain to ask any questions.  It is hard that the life of one of
the King's subjects should be taken away upon the perjured oaths of
such villains as these (Bradingham and Palmer).  Because I would not
yield to their wishes and turn pirate, they now endeavor to prove I was
one.  Bradingham is saving his life to take away mine."

The Crown proved the capture of the two ships belonging to the Great
Mogul, and an East Indian merchant, representing the merchants,
testified as to the value of the lading and the regularity of the
ship's papers.  Kidd challenged this evidence, and once more pleaded
with the Court that he be allowed to bring forward the French passes.
He asserted that the _Quedah Merchant_ had a French Commission, and
that her master was a tavern keeper of Surat.  That he told the truth,
the accompanying photograph of the said document bears belated witness.
The Lord Chief Baron put his finger on the weak point of the case by
asking to know why Kidd had not taken the ship to port to be lawfully
condemned as a prize, as demanded by the terms of his commission from
the King.  To this Kidd replied that his crew were mutinous, and the
_Adventure Galley_ unseaworthy, for which reasons he made for the
nearest harbor of Madagascar.  There his men, to the number of ninety
odd, mutinied and went over to the pirate Culliford in the _Mocha
Frigate_.  He was left short-handed, his own ship was unfit to take to
sea, so he burned her, and transferred to the _Quedah Merchant_, after
which he steered straight for Boston to deliver her prize to Lord
Bellomont, which he would have done had he not learned in the West
Indies that he had been proclaimed a pirate.

Edward Davis, mariner, confirmed the statement regarding the French
passes, in these words:

"I came home a passenger from Madagascar and from thence to Amboyna,
and there he (Kidd) sent his boat ashore, and there was one that said
Captain Kidd was published a pirate in England, and Captain Kidd gave
those passes to him to read.  The Captain said they were French passes."

_Kidd_.  "You heard that one, Captain Elms, say they were French
passes?"

_Davis_.  "Yes, I heard Captain Elms say they were French passes."

_Mr. Baron Hatsell_.  "Have you any more to say, Captain Kidd?"

_Kidd_.  "I have some papers, but my Lord Bellomont keeps them from me,
so that I cannot bring them before the Court!"

Bradingham and other members of the crew admitted that they understood
from Kidd that the captured ships were sailing under French passes.
Kidd, having been convicted of murder, was now allowed to fetch in
witnesses as to his character as a man and a sailor previous to the
fatal voyage.  One Captain Humphrey swore that he had known Capt. Kidd
in the West Indies twelve years before.  "You had a general applause,"
said he, "for what you had done from time to time."

_The Lord Chief Baron_.  "That was before he was turned pirate."

Captain Bond then declared:

"I know you were very useful at the beginning of the war in the West
Indies."

Colonel Hewson put the matter more forcibly and made no bones of
telling the Court:

"My Lord, he was a mighty man there.  He served under my command there.
He was sent to me by the order of Colonel Codrington."

_The Solicitor General_.  "How long was this ago?"

_Colonel Hewson_.  "About nine years ago.  He was with me in two
engagements against the French, and fought as well as any man I ever
saw, according to the proportion of his men.  We had six Frenchmen
(ships) to deal with, and we had only mine and his ship."

_Kidd_.  "Do you think I was a pirate?"

_Colonel Hewson_.  "I knew his men would have gone a-pirating, and he
refused it, and his men seized upon his ship; and when he went this
last voyage, he consulted with me, and told me they had engaged him in
such an expedition.  And I told him that he had enough already and
might be content with what he had.  And he said that was his own
inclination, but Lord Bellomont told him if he did not go the voyage
there were great men who would stop his brigantine in the river if he
did not go."

_Thomas Cooper_.  "I was aboard the _Lyon_ in the West Indies and this
Captain Kidd brought his ship from a place that belonged to the Dutch
and brought her into the King's service at the beginning of the war,
about ten years ago.  And he took service under the Colonel (Hewson),
and we fought Monsieur Du Cass a whole day, and I thank God we got the
better of him.  And Captain Kidd behaved very well in the face of his
enemies."

It may be said also for Captain William Kidd that he behaved very well
in the face of the formidable battery of legal adversaries.

As a kind of afterthought, the jury found him guilty of piracy along
with several of his crew, Nichols Churchill, James How, Gabriel Loiff,
Hugh Parrott, Abel Owens, and Darby Mullins.  Three of those indicted
were set free, Richard Barlicorn, Robert Lumley, and William Jenkins,
because they were able to prove themselves to have been bound seamen
apprentices, duly indentured to officers of the ship who were
responsible for their deeds.  Before sentence was passed on him, Kidd
said to the Court:

"My Lords, it is a very hard judgment.  For my part I am the most
innocent person of them all."

Execution Dock long since vanished from old London, but tradition has
survived along the waterfront of Wapping to fix the spot, and the worn
stone staircase known as the "Pirates' Stairs," still leads down to the
river, and down these same steps walked Captain William Kidd.  The
_Gentleman's Magazine_ (London) for 1796 describes the ancient
procedure, just as it had befallen Captain Kidd and his men:

"Feb. 4th.  This morning, a little after ten o'clock, Colley, Cole, and
Blanche, the three sailors convicted of the murder of Captain Little,
were brought out of Newgate, and conveyed in solemn procession to
Execution Dock, there to receive the punishment awarded by law.  On the
cart on which they rode was an elevated stage; on this were seated
Colley, the principal instigator in the murder, in the middle, and his
two wretched instruments, the Spaniard Blanche, and the Mulatto Cole,
on each side of him; and behind, on another seat, two executioners.

"Colley seemed in a state resembling that of a man stupidly
intoxicated, and scarcely awake, and the two discovered little
sensibility on this occasion, nor to the last moment of their
existence, did they, as we hear, make any confession.  They were turned
off about a quarter before twelve in the midst of an immense crowd of
spectators.  On the way to the place of execution, they were preceded
by the Marshall of the Admiralty in his carriage, the Deputy Marshall,
bearing the silver oar, and the two City Marshals on horseback,
Sheriff's officers, etc.  The whole cavalcade was conducted with great
solemnity."

John Taylor, "the water poet," who lived in the time of Captain Kidd,
wrote these doleful lines, which may serve as a kind of obituary:

  "There are inferior Gallowses which bear,
  (According to the season) twice a year;
  And there's a kind of waterish tree at Wapping
  Where sea-thieves or pirates are catched napping."


Kidd's body, covered with tar and hung in chains, was gibbeted on the
shore of the reach of the Thames hard by Tilbury Fort, as was the
customary manner of displaying dead pirates by way of warning to
passing seamen.  His treasure was confiscated by the Crown, and what
was left of it, after the array of legal gentlemen had been paid their
fees, was turned over to Greenwich Hospital by act of Parliament.

======================================================================

[Illustration: Kidd hanging in chains.  (_From The Pirates' Own Book_.)]

"The Pirates' Stairs" leading to the site of Execution Dock at Wapping
where Kidd was hanged.  The old stone steps are visible beneath the
modern iron bridge.

======================================================================

Thus lived and died a man, who, whatever may have been his faults, was
unfairly dealt with by his patrons, misused by his rascally crew, and
slandered by credulous posterity.



[1] History of England.

[2] Published in 1701.

[3] Macauley.

[4] "From hence putting off to the West Indies, wee were not many dayes
at sea, but there beganne among our people such mortalitie as in fewe
days there were dead above two or three hundred men.  And until some
seven or eight dayes after our coming from S. Iago, there had not died
any one man of sickness in all the fleete; the sickness shewed not his
infection wherewith so many were stroken until we were departed thence,
and then seazed our people with extreme hot burning and continuall
agues, whereof very fewe escaped with life, and yet those for the most
part not without great alteration and decay of their wittes and
strength for a long time after."--Hakluyt's Voyages.--(A Summarie and
True Discourse of Sir Francis Drake's West Indian voyage begun in the
Year 1585.)

[5] The _Quedah Merchant_.

[6] The _Quedah Merchant_.




CHAPTER V

THE WONDROUS FORTUNE OF WILLIAM PHIPS

The flaw in the business of treasure hunting, outside of fiction, is
that the persons equipped with the shovels and picks and the ancient
charts so seldom find the hidden gold.  The energy, credulity, and
persistence of these explorers are truly admirable but the results have
been singularly shy of dividends the world over.  There is genuine
satisfaction, therefore, in sounding the name and fame of the man who
not only went roving in search of lost treasure but also found and
fetched home more of it than any other adventurer known to this kind of
quest.

On the coast of Maine, near where the Kennebec flows past Bath into the
sea, there is a bit of tide water known as Montsweag Bay, hard by the
town of Wiscasset.  Into this little bay extends a miniature cape,
pleasantly wooded, which is known as Phips Point, and here it was that
the most illustrious treasure seeker of them all, William Phips, was
born in 1650.  The original Pilgrim Fathers, or some of them, were
still hale and hearty, the innumerable ship-loads of furniture brought
over in the _Mayflower_ had not been scattered far from Plymouth, and
this country was so young that the "oldest families" of Boston were all
brand-new.

James Phips, father of the great William, was a gun-smith who had come
over from Bristol in old England to better his fortunes.  With the true
pioneering spirit he obtained a grant of land and built his log cabin
at the furthest outpost of settlement toward the eastward.  He cleared
his fields, raised some sheep, and betimes repaired the blunderbusses
with which Puritan and Pilgrim were wont to pot the aborigine.  The
first biography of William Phips was written by Cotton Mather, whom the
better you know the more heartily you dislike for a canting old bigot
who boot-licked men of rank, wealth, or power, and was infernally
active in getting a score of hapless men and women hanged for
witchcraft in Salem.

Cotton Mather deserves the thanks of all good treasure seekers,
however, for having given us the first-hand story of William Phips whom
he knew well and extravagantly admired.  In fact, after this hero had
come sailing home with his treasures and because of these riches was
made Sir William Phips and Royal Governor of Massachusetts by Charles
II, he had his pew in the old North Church of Boston of which Rev.
Cotton Mather was pastor.  But this is going ahead too fast, and we
must hark back to the humble beginnings.  "His faithful mother, yet
living," wrote Mather in his very curious _Magnalia Christi Americana_,
"had no less than Twenty-six Children, whereof Twenty-one were Sons:
but Equivalent to them all was William, one of the youngest, whom his
Father dying, was left young with his mother, and with her he lived,
keeping ye Sheep in the Wilderness until he was Eighteen Years old."

Then William decided that the care of the farm and the sheep might
safely be left to his twenty brothers, and he apprenticed himself to a
shipwright who was building on the shore near the settlement those
little shallops, pinnaces, and sloops in which our forefathers dared to
trade up and down their own coasts and as far as the West Indies, mere
cockle-shells manned by seamen of astonishing temerity and hardihood.
While at work with hammer and adze, this strapping lump of a lad
listened to the yarns of skippers who had voyaged to Jamaica and the
Bahamas, dodging French privateers or running afoul of pirates who
stripped them of cargo and gear, and perhaps it was then that he first
heard of the treasures that had been lost in wrecked galleons, or
buried by buccaneers of Hispaniola.  At any rate, William Phips wished
to see more of the world and to win a chance to go to sea in a ship of
his own, wherefore he set out for Boston after he had served his time,
"having an accountable impulse upon his mind, persuading him, as he
would privately hint unto some of his friends, that he was born to
greater matters."

Twenty-two years old, not yet able to read and write, young Phips found
work with a ship-carpenter and studied his books as industriously as he
plied his trade.  Soon he was wooing a "young gentlewoman of good
repute, the daughter of one Captain Roger Spencer," and there was no
resisting this headstrong suitor.  They were married, and shortly after
this important event Phips was given a contract to build a ship at a
settlement on Sheepscot river, near his old home on the Kennebec,
"where having launched the ship," Cotton Mather relates, "he also
provided a lading of lumber to bring with him, which would have been to
the advantage of all concerned.

"But just as the ship was hardly finished, the barbarous Indians on
that river broke forth into an open and cruel war upon the English, and
the miserable people, surprised by so sudden a storm of blood, had no
refuge from the infidels but the ship now finishing in the harbor.
Wherefore he left his intended lading behind him, and instead thereof
carried with him his old neighbors and their families, free of all
charges, to Boston.  So the first thing he did, after he was his own
man, was to save his father's house, with the rest of the neighborhood
from ruin; but the disappointment which befell him from the loss of his
other lading plunged his affairs into greater embarrassment with such
as he had employed him.  But he was hitherto no more than beginning to
make scaffolds for further and higher actions.  He would frequently
tell the gentlewoman, his wife, that he should yet be Captain of a
King's Ship; that he should come to have the command of better men than
he was now accounted himself, and that he would be the owner of a fair
brick house in the Green Lane of North Boston."[1]

Inasmuch as William Phips would have been a very sorry scoundrel
indeed, to run away, for the sake of a cargo of lumber, and leave his
old friends and neighbors to be scalped, it seems as Cotton Mather was
sounding the timbrel of praise somewhat over-loud, but the parson was a
fulsome eulogist, and for reasons of his own he proclaimed this
roaring, blustering seafarer and hot-headed royal governor as little
lower than the angels.  Here and there Mather drew with firm stroke the
character of the man, so that we catch glimpses of him as a live and
moving figure.  "He was of an inclination cutting rather like a hatchet
than a razor; he would propose very considerable matters and then so
cut through them that no difficulties could put by the edge of his
resolution.  Being thus of the true temper for doing of great things,
he betakes himself to the sea, the right scene for such things."

======================================================================

[Illustration: Sir William Phips, first royal governor of
Massachusetts.]

======================================================================

Phips had no notion of being a beggarly New England trading skipper,
carrying codfish and pine boards to the West Indies and threshing
homeward with molasses and niggers in the hold, or coasting to Virginia
for tobacco.  A man of mettle won prizes by bold strokes and large
hazards, and treasure seeking was the game for William.  Among the
taverns of the Boston water-front he picked up tidings and rumors of
many a silver-laden galleon of Spain that had shivered her timbers on
this or that low-lying reef of the Bahama Passage where there was
neither buoy nor lighthouse.  Here was a chance to win that "fair brick
house in the Green Lane of North Boston" and Phips busied himself with
picking up information until he was primed to make a voyage of
discovery.  Keeping his errand to himself, he steered for the West
Indies, probably in a small chartered sloop or brig, and prowled from
one key and island to another.

This was in the year 1681, and the waters in which Phips dared to
venture were swarming with pirates and buccaneers who would have cut
his throat for a doubloon.  Morgan had sacked Panama only eleven years
before; Tortuga, off the coast of Hayti, was still the haunt of as
choice a lot of cutthroats as ever sailed blue water; and men who had
been plundering and killing with Pierre le Grande, Bartholomew Portugez
and Montbars the Exterminator, were still at their old trade afloat.
Mariners had not done talking about the exploit of L'Ollonais who had
found three hundred thousand dollars' worth of Spanish treasure hidden
on a key off the coast of Cuba.  He it was who amused himself by
cutting out the hearts of live Spaniards and gnawing these morsels, or
slicing off the heads of a whole ship's crew and drinking their blood.
A rare one for hunting buried treasure was this fiend of a pirate.
When he took Maracaibo, as Esquemeling relates in the story of his own
experiences as a buccaneer, "L'Ollonais, who never used to make any
great amount of murdering, though in cold blood, ten or twelve
Spaniards, drew his cutlass and hacked one to pieces in the presence of
all the rest, saying: 'If you do not confess and declare where you have
hidden the rest of your goods, I will do the like to all your
companions.'  At last, amongst these horrible cruelties and inhuman
threats, one was found who promised to conduct him and show the place
where the rest of the Spaniards were hidden.  But those that were fled,
having intelligence that one discovered their lurking holes to the
Pirates, changed the place, and buried all the remnant of their riches
underground; insomuch that the Pirates could not find them out, unless
some other person of their own party should reveal them."

From this first voyage undertaken by Phips he escaped with his skin and
a certain amount of treasure, "what just served him a little to furnish
him for a voyage to England," says Mather.  The important fact was that
he had found what he sought and knew where there was a vast deal more
of it.  A large ship, well armed and manned, was needed to bring away
the booty, and Captain William Phips intended to find backing in London
for the adventure.  He crossed the Atlantic in "a vessel not much
unlike that which the Dutchmen stamped on their first coin," and no
sooner had his stubby, high-pooped ark of a craft cast anchor in the
Thames than he was buzzing ashore with his tale of the treasure wreck.

It was no less a person than the king himself whom Phips was bent on
enlisting as a partner, and he was not to be driven from Whitehall by
lords or flunkies.  With bulldog persistence he held to his purpose
month after month, until almost a year had passed.  At length, through
the friends he had made at Court, he gained the ear of Charles II, and
that gay monarch was pleased to take a fling at treasure hunting as a
sporting proposition, with an eye also to a share of the plunder.

He gave Phips a frigate of the king's navy, the _Rose_ of eighteen guns
and ninety-five men, which had been captured from the Algerine
corsairs.  As "Captain of a King's Ship," he recruited a crew of all
sorts, mostly hard characters, and sailed from London in September,
1683, bound first to Boston, and thence to find the treasure.  Alas,
for the cloak of piety with which Cotton Mather covered William Phips
from head to heels.  Other accounts show convincingly that he was a
bullying, profane, and godless sea dog, yet honest withal, and as brave
as a lion, an excellent man to have at your elbow in a tight pinch, or
to be in charge of the quarter-deck in a gale of wind.  The real Phips
is a more likeable character than the stuffed image that Cotton Mather
tried to make of him.

While in Boston harbor in the _Rose_, Captain Phips carried things with
a high hand.  Another skipper had got wind of the treasure and was
about to make sail for the West Indies in a ship called the _Good
Intent_.  Phips tried to bluff him, then to frighten him, and finally
struck a partnership so that the two vessels sailed in company.
Refusing to show the Boston magistrates his papers, Phips was haled to
court where he abused the bench in language blazing with deep-sea
oaths, and was fined several hundred pounds.  His sailors got drunk
ashore and fought the constables and cracked the heads of peaceable
citizens.  Staid Boston was glad when the _Rose_ frigate and her
turbulent company bore away for the West Indies.

There was something wrong with Phip's information or the Spanish wreck
had been cleaned of her treasure before he found the place.  The _Rose_
and the _Good Intent_ lay at the edge of a reef somewhere near Nassau
for several months, sending down native divers and dredging with such
scanty returns that the crew became mutinous and determined on a
program very popular in those days.  Armed with cutlasses, they charged
aft and demanded of Phips that he "join them in running away with the
ship to drive a trade of piracy in the South Seas.  Captain Phips ...
with a most undaunted fortitude, rushed in upon them, and with the
blows of his bare hands felled many of them and quelled all the rest."

It became necessary to careen the _Rose_ and clean the planking all
fouled with tropical growth, and she was beached on "a desolate Spanish
island."  The men were given shore liberty, all but eight or ten, and
the rogues were no sooner out of the ship than "they all entered into
an agreement which they signed in a ring (a round-robin), that about
seven o'clock that evening they would seize the captain and those eight
or ten which they knew to be true to him, and leave them to perish on
the island, and so be gone away into the South Seas to seek their
fortune....  These knaves, considering that they should want a
carpenter with them in their villainous expedition, sent a messenger to
fetch unto them the carpenter who was then at work upon the vessel; and
unto him they showed their articles; telling him what he must look for
if he did not subscribe among them.

"The carpenter, being an honest fellow, did with much importunity
prevail for one half hour's time to consider the matter; and returning
to work upon the vessel, with a spy by them set upon him, he feigned
himself taken with a fit of the collick, for the relief whereof he
suddenly ran into the captain in the great cabin for a dram.  Where,
when he came, his business was only in brief to tell the captain of the
horrible distress which he has fallen into; but the captain bid him as
briefly return to the rogues in the woods and sign their articles, and
leave him to provide for the rest.

"The carpenter was no sooner gone than Captain Phips, calling together
the few friends that were left him aboard, whereof the gunner was one,
demanded of them whether they would stand by him in this extremity,
whereto they replied they would stand by him if he could save them, and
he answered, 'By the help of God, he did not fear it.'  All their
provisions had been carried ashore to a tent made for that purpose,
about which they had placed several great guns, to defend it in case of
any assault from Spaniards.  Wherefore Captain Phips immediately
ordered those guns to be silently drawn and turned; and so pulling up
the bridge, he charged his great guns aboard and brought them to bear
on every side of the tent.

"By this time the army of rebels came out of the woods; but as they
drew near to the tent of provisions they saw such a change of
circumstances that they cried out, _We are betrayed_!  And they were
soon confirmed in it when they heard the captain with a stern fury call
to them, _Stand off, ye wretches, at your peril_.  He quickly cast them
into more than ordinary confusion when they saw him ready to fire his
great guns upon them.

"And when he had signified unto them his resolve to abandon them unto
all the desolation which they had proposed for him, he caused the
bridge to be again laid, and his men began to take the provisions on
board.  When the wretches beheld what was coming upon them, they fell
to very humble entreaties; and at last fell down upon their knees
protesting that they never had anything against him, except only his
unwillingness to go away with the King's ship upon the South Sea
design.  But upon all other accounts they would choose rather to live
and die with him than with any man in the world.  However, when they
saw how much he was dissatisfied at it, they would insist upon it no
more, and humbly begged his pardon.  And when he judged that he had
kept them on their knees long enough, he having first secured their
arms, received them aboard, but he immediately weighed anchor and
arriving at Jamaica, turned them off."

This is a very proper incident to have happened in a hunt for hidden
treasure, and Cotton Mather tells it well.  One forgives Phips for
damning the eyes of the Boston magistrates, and likely enough they
deserved it, when it is recalled that the witchcraft trials were held
only a few years later.  Having rid himself of the mutineers, Captain
Phips shipped other scoundrels in their stead, there being small choice
at Jamaica where every other man had been pirating or was planning to
go again.  His first quest for treasure had been a failure, but he was
not the man to quit, and so he filled away for Hispaniola, now Hayti
and San Domingo, where every bay and reef had a treasure story of its
own.

The small island of Tortuga off that coast had long been the
headquarters of the most successful pirates and buccaneers of those
seas, and Frederick A. Ober, who knows the West Indies as well as any
living man, declares not only that Cuba, the Isle of Pines, Jamaica,
and Hispaniola are girdled with Spanish wrecks containing "as yet
unrecovered millions and millions in gold and silver," but also that
"during the successive occupancies of Tortuga by the various pirate
bands great treasure was hidden in the forest, and in the caves with
which the island abounds.  Now and again the present cultivators of
Tortuga find coins of ancient dates, fragments of gold chains, and
pieces of quaint jewelry cast up by the waves or revealed by the
shifting sands.

"It was not without reason that the only harbor of the buccaneers was
called Treasure Cove, nor for nothing that they dug the deep caves
deeper, hollowing out lateral tunnels and blasting holes beneath the
frowning cliffs.  The island now belongs to Hayti, the inhabitants of
which have not the requisite sagacity to conduct an intelligent search
for the long-buried treasures; and as they resent the intrusion of
foreigners, it is probable that the buccaneers' spoils will remain an
unknown quantity for many years to come."

Captain William Phips lay at anchor off one of the rude settlements of
Hispaniola for some time, and his rough-and-ready address won him
friends, among them "a very old Spaniard" who had seen many a galleon
pillaged by the pirates.  From this informant Phips "fished up a little
advice about the true spot where lay the wreck which he had hitherto
been seeking ... that it was upon a reef of shoals a few leagues to the
northward of Port de la Plata upon Hispaniola, a port so called, it
seemed, from the landing of some of a shipwrecked company, with a boat
full of plate saved out of their sunken Frigot."

======================================================================

[Illustration: Map of Hispaniola (Hayti and San Domingo) engraved in
1723, showing the buccaneers at their trade of hunting wild cattle.
The galleon due north of Port Plate on the north coast is almost
exactly in the place where Phips found his treasure.]

======================================================================

On the very old map of Hispaniola, reproduced herewith, this place is
indicated on the north coast as "Port Plate," and due north of it is
the spirited drawing of a galleon which happens to be very nearly in
the position of the sunken treasure which the old Spaniard described to
Captain Phips.  The _Rose_ frigate sailed in search of the reef and
explored it with much care but failed to find the wreck.  Phips was
confident that he was on the right track, however, and decided to
return to England, refit and ship a new crew.  The riff-raff which he
had picked up at Jamaica in place of the mutineers were hardly the lads
to be trusted with a great store of treasure on board.

At about this time, Charles II quit his earthly kingdom and it is to be
hoped found another kind of treasure laid up for him.  James II needed
all his warships, and he promptly took the _Rose_ frigate from Captain
Phips and set him adrift to shift for himself.  A man of less
inflexible resolution and courage might have been disheartened, but
Phips made a louder noise than ever with his treasure story, and would
not budge from London.  He was put in jail, somehow got himself out,
and stood up to his enemies and silenced them, all the while seeking
noble patrons with money to venture on another voyage.

At length, and a year had been spent in this manner, Phips interested
the Duke of Albemarle, son of the famous General Monk who had been
active in restoring Charles II to the throne of the Stuarts.  Several
other gentlemen of the Court took shares in the speculation, including
a naval man, Sir John Narborough.  They put up L2,400 to outfit a ship,
and the King was persuaded to grant Phips letters of patent, or a
commission as a duly authorized treasure seeker, in return for which
favor His Majesty was to receive one-tenth of the booty.  To Phips was
promised a sixteenth of what he should recover.

This enterprise was conceived in 1686, and was so singularly like the
partnership formed ten years later to finance the cruise of Captain
Kidd after pirates' plunder that the Earl of Bellomont, Lord Chancellor
Somers, the Earl of Shrewsbury, and William III may have been somewhat
inspired to undertake this unlucky venture by the dazzling success of
the Phips "syndicate."

In a small merchantman called the _James and Mary_, Captain Phips set
sail from England in 1686, having another vessel to serve as a tender.
Arriving at Port de la Plata, he hewed out a large canoe from a
cotton-wood tree, "so large as to carry eight or ten oars," says Cotton
Mather, "for the making of which perigua (as they call it), he did,
with the same industry that he did everything else, employ his own hand
and adze, and endure no little hardship, lying abroad in the woods many
nights together."  The canoe was used by a gang of native divers
quartered on board the tender.  For some time they worked along the
edge of a reef called the Boilers, guided by the story of that ancient
Spaniard, but found nothing to reward their exertions.

This crew was returning to report to Captain Phips when one of the men,
staring over the side into the wonderfully clear water, spied a "sea
feather" or marine plant of uncommon beauty growing from what appeared
to be a rock.  An Indian was sent down to fetch it as a souvenir of the
bootless quest, that they might, however, carry home something with
them.  This diver presently bobbed up with the sea feather, and
therewithal a surprising story "that he perceived a number of great
guns in the watery world, where he had found the feather; the report of
which great guns exceedingly astonished the whole company; and at once
turned their despondencies for their ill success into assurances that
they had now lit upon the true spot of ground which they had been
looking for; and they were further confirmed in these assurances when
upon further diving, the Indian fetched up a _Sow_ as they styled it,
or a lump of silver worth perhaps two or three hundred pounds.  Upon
this they prudently buoyed the place, that they might readily find it
again; and they went back unto their Captain whom for some while they
distressed with nothing but such bad news as they formerly thought they
must have carried him.  Nevertheless, they so slipped the Sow of silver
on one side under the table (where they were now sitting with the
Captain, and hearing him express his resolutions to wait still
patiently upon the Providence of God under these disappointments), that
when he should look on one side, he might see that Odd Thing before
him.  At last he saw it and cried out with some agony:

"'_What is this?  Whence comes this?_'  And then with changed
countenance they told him how and where they got it.  Then said he,
'_Thanks be to God!  We are made!_'  And so away they went, all hands
to work; wherein they had this further piece of remarkable prosperity,
that whereas if they had first fallen upon that part of the Spanish
wreck where the Pieces of Eight had been stowed in bags among the
ballast, they had seen more laborious and less enriching times of it.
Now, most happily, they first fell upon that room in the wreck where
the Bullion had been stored up, and then so prospered in this new
fishery that in a little while they had without the loss of any man's
life, brought up _Thirty Two Tons_ of silver, for it was now come to
measuring silver by tons."

While these jolly treasure seekers were hauling up the silver hand over
fist, one Adderley, a seaman of the New Providence in the Bahamas, was
hired with his vessel to help in the gorgeous salvage operations.
Alas, after Adderley had recovered six tons of bullion, the sight of so
much treasure was too much for him.  He took his share to the Bermudas
and led such a gay life with it that he went mad and died after a year
or two.  Hard-hearted William Phips was a man of another kind, and he
drove his crew of divers and wreckers, the sailors keeping busy on deck
at hammering from the silver bars a crust of limestone several inches
thick from which "they knocked out whole bushels of pieces of eight
which were grown thereinto.  Besides that incredible treasure of plate
in various forms, thus fetched up from seven or eight fathoms under
water, there were vast riches of Gold, and Pearls, and Jewels, which
they also lit upon: and indeed for a more comprehensive invoice, I must
but summarily say, _All that a Spanish frigot was to be enriched
withal_."

At length the little squadron ran short of provisions, and most
reluctantly Captain Phips decided to run for England with his precious
cargo and return the next year.  He swore all his men to secrecy,
believing that there was more good fishing at the wreck.  During the
homeward voyage, his seamen quite naturally yearned for a share of the
profits, they having signed on for monthly wages.  They were for taking
the ship "to be gone and lead a short life and a merry one," but Phips
argued them out of this rebellious state of mind, promising every man a
share of the silver, and if his employers would not agree to this, to
pay them from his own pocket.

Up the Thames sailed the lucky little merchantman, _James and Mary_ in
the year of 1687, with three hundred thousand pounds sterling
freightage of treasure in her hold, which would amount to a good deal
more than a million and a half dollars nowadays.  Captain Phips played
fair with his seamen, and they fled ashore in the greatest good humor
to fling their pieces of eight among the taverns and girls of Wapping,
Limehouse, and Rotherhite.  The King was given his tenth of the cargo,
and a handsome fortune it was.  To Phips fell his allotted share of a
sixteenth, which set him up with sixteen thousand pounds sterling.  The
Duke of Albemarle was so much gratified that he sent to that
"gentlewoman" Mrs. William Phips, a gold cup worth a thousand pounds.
Phips showed himself an honest man in age when sea morals were
exceeding lax, and not a penny of the treasure, beyond what was due
him, stuck to his fingers.  Men of his integrity were not over
plentiful in England after the Restoration, and the King liked and
trusted this brusque, stalwart sailor from New England.  At Windsor
Castle he was knighted and now it was Sir William Phips, if you please.

Judge Sewall's diary contains this entry, Friday, October 21, 1687:

"I went to offer my Lady Phips my House by Mr. Moody's and to
congratulate her preferment.  As to the former, she had bought Sam'
Wakefield's House and Ground last night for L350.  I gave her a Gazette
that related her Husband's Knighthood, which she had not seen before;
and wish'd this success might not hinder her passage to a greater and
better estate.  She gave me a cup of good Beer and thank'd me for my
visit."

Sir William would have still another try at the wreck, and this time
there was no lack of ships and patronage.  A squadron was fitted out in
command of Sir John Narborough, and one of the company was the Duke of
Albemarle.  They made their way to the reef, but the remainder of the
treasure had been lifted, and the expedition sailed home empty-handed.
Adderley of New Providence had babbled in his cups and one of his men
had been bribed to take a party of Bermuda wreckers to the reef.  The
place was soon swarming with all sorts of craft, some of them from
Jamaica and Hispaniola, and they found a large amount of silver before
they stripped the wreck clean.

The King offered Sir William a place as one of the Commissioners of the
Royal Navy, but he was homesick for New England and desired to be a
person of consequence in his own land.  His friends obtained for him a
patent as High Sheriff of Massachusetts and he returned to Boston after
five years' absence "to entertain his Lady with some accomplishment of
his predictions; and then built himself a fair brick house in the very
place which was foretold."

The "fair brick house" was of two stories with a portico and columns.
It stood on the corner of the present Salem Street (then the Green
Lane) and Charter Street, so named by Sir William Phips in honor of the
new charter under which he became the first provincial or royal
governor.  There was a lawn and gardens, a watch-house and stables, and
a stately row of butternuts.  "North Boston" was then the fashionable
or "Court end" of the town.

The Puritans and Pilgrims were seething with indignation against the
royal government overseas.  The original charter under which the Colony
of Massachusetts Bay exercised self-government had been annulled, and
Charles II was determined to bring all the New England Colonies under
the sway of a royal governor.  The question of taxation had also begun
to simmer a full century before the Revolution.  Sir William Phips
found his berth of High Sheriff a difficult and turbulent business, and
"the infamous Government then rampant there, found a way wholly to put
by the execution of his patent; yea, he was like to have had his person
assassinated in the face of the sun, before his own door."

This rough ship carpenter and treasure seeker weathered the storm and
rose so high in the good graces of the throne that in 1692 he carried
to Massachusetts the new charter signed by William III by virtue of
which he became the first royal governor of that colony, and as an
administrator he was no less interesting than when he was cruising off
the coast of Hispaniola.  The manners of the quarterdeck he carried to
the governor's office.  His fists were as ready as his tongue, and his
term of two years was enlivened by one lusty quarrel after another.  In
nowise ashamed of his humble beginnings, he gave a dinner to his old
friends of the Boston ship-yard and told these honest artisans that if
it were not for his service to the people, he "would be much easier in
returning to his broad axe again."

Hawthorne has given a picture of him in the days of his greatness, "a
man of strong and sturdy frame, whose face has been roughened by
northern tempests, and blackened by the burning sun of the West Indies.
He wears an immense periwig flowing down over his shoulders.  His coat
has a wide embroidery of golden foliage, and his waistcoat likewise is
all flowered over and bedizened with gold.  His red, rough hands, which
have done many a good day's work with the hammer and adze, are half
covered by the delicate lace ruffles at his wrists.  On a table lies
his silver-headed sword, and in a corner of the room stands his
gold-headed cane, made of a beautifully polished West India wood."

Cotton Mather helps to complete the presentment by relating that "he
was very tall, beyond the common set of men, and thick as well as tall,
and strong as well as thick.  He was in all respects exceedingly
robust, and able to conquer such difficulties of diet and travel as
would have killed most men alive.  Nor did the fat whereinto he grew
very much in his later years, take away the vigor of his motions."

As a fighting seaman and soldier, Sir William Phips saw hard service
before he was made royal governor.  In 1690 he was in command of an
expedition which made a successful raid on the French in Arcadia,
captured Port Royal, and conquered the province.  Among the English
state papers in the Public Record office is his own account of this
feat of arms of his expedition against Quebec.  "In March, 1690," he
wrote, "I sailed with seven ships and seven hundred men, raised by the
people of New England, reduced Arcadia in three weeks and returned to
Boston.  It was then thought well to prosecute a further expedition.
2300 men were raised, with whom and with about thirty ships I sailed
from New England on the 10th, August, 1690, but by bad weather and
contrary winds did not reach Quebec till October.  The frost was
already so sharp that it made two inches of ice in a night.

"After summoning Count de Frontenac and receiving a reviling answer, I
brought my ships up within musket shot of their cannon and fired with
such success that I dismounted several of their largest cannon and beat
them from their works in less than twenty-four hours.  At the same time
1400 men, who had been landed, defeated a great part of the enemy, and
by the account of the prisoners, the city must have been taken in two
or three days, but the small-pox and fever increased so fast as to
delay the pushing of the siege till the weather became too severe to
permit it.  On my leaving Quebec, I received several messages from
French merchants of the best reputation, saying how uneasy they were
under French administration, and how willing they were to be under
their Majesties."

======================================================================

[Illustration: Permit issued by Sir William Phips as royal governor in
which he uses the title "Vice Admiral" which involved him in disastrous
quarrels.]

======================================================================

In a "Narrative of the Expedition against Quebec," written at the time,
is this passage:

"Whilst these things were doing on shore, Sir Wm. Phips with his men of
war came close up to ye City.  He did acquit himself with ye greatest
bravery.  I have diligently enquired of those that know it who affirm
there was nothing wanting in his Part, either as to Conduct or Courage.
He ventured within Pistol shot of their cannon, and soon beat them from
thence, and battered ye Town very much.  He was for some Hours warmly
entertained with their great Guns.  The Vessel wherein Sir William
commanded had 200 men.  It was shot through in a hundred places with
shot of twenty-four pound weight; yet through ye wonderful Providence
of God, but one man was killed and two mortally wounded in that hot
Engagement, which continued ye greatest part of ye night and ye next
day several hours."

Another letter written by Sir William Phips, addressed from Boston to
William Blathwayt, soon after he was made Governor, shows him in a
light even more engaging.  The witchcraft frenzy was at its height, and
only three weeks before this date, October 12, 1692, fourteen men and
women had been hanged in Salem.  This letter, as copied from the
original document, runs as follows:

"On my arrival I found this Province miserably harrassed by a most
horrible witchcraft or possession of devils, which had broken in upon
several towns.  Some scores of poor people were taken with
preternatural torments; some were scalded with brimstone; some had pins
stuck into their flesh, others were hurried into fire and water, and
some were dragged out of their houses and carried over the tops of
trees and hills for many miles together.

"It has been represented to me as much like that of Sweden thirty years
ago, and there were many committed to prison on suspicion of witchcraft
before my arrival.  The loud cries and clamor of the friends of the
afflicted, together with the advice of the Deputy Governor and Council,
prevailed with me to appoint a Court of Oyer and Terminer to discover
what witchcraft might be at the bottom, and whether it were not a
possession.  The chief judge was the Deputy Governor, and the rest
people of the best prudence and figure that could be pitched upon.

"At Salem in Essex County they convicted more than twenty persons of
witchcraft, and some of the accused confessed their guilt.  The Court,
as I understand, began their proceedings with the accusations of the
afflicted persons, and then went upon other evidences to strengthen
that.  I was in the East of the Colony throughout almost the whole of
the proceedings, trusting to the Court as the right method of dealing
with cases of witchcraft.  But when I returned I found many persons in
a strange ferment of dissatisfaction which was increased by some hot
spirits that blew upon the flame.  But on enquiry into the matter, I
found that the Devil had taken upon him the name and shape of several
persons who were doubtless innocent, for which cause I have now
forbidden the committal of any more accused persons.

"And them that have been committed I would shelter from any proceedings
wherein the innocent could suffer wrong.  I would also await the King's
orders in this perplexing affair.  I have put a stop to the printing of
any discourses on either side that may increase useless disputes, for
open contests would mean an unextinguishable flame.  I have been
grieved to see that some who should have done better services to their
Majesties and this Province have so far taken counsel with passion as
to declare the precipitancy of these matters....  As soon as I had done
fighting the King's enemies, and understood the danger of innocent
people through the accusations of the afflicted, I put a stop to the
Court proceedings till the King's pleasure should be known."

It was Governor Phips who suppressed the witchcraft persecutions and
the special court that had passed so many wicked death sentences was
shorn of its powers by his order.  Other prisoners were later
acquitted, and a hundred and fifty released from jail.  No sooner was
this burly figure of a man finished with the witchcraft business than
he was leading a force of Indian allies against the French.  "His birth
and youth in the East had rendered him well known to the Indians
there," says Cotton Mather, "he had hunted and fished many a weary day
in his childhood with them; and when these rude savages had got the
story that he had found a ship full of money, and was now become all
one a King, they were mightily astonished at it; but when they further
understood that he was now become the Governor of New England, it added
a further degree of consternation to their astonishment."

He was too strenuous a person, was this astonishing William Phips, to
remain tamed and conservative when there was no strong work in hand.
With that gold-headed cane of his he cracked the head of the Captain of
the _Nonesuch_ frigate of the royal navy, and with his hard fists he
pounded the Collector of the Port after swearing at him with such oaths
as better befitted a buccaneer than the governor of the province.
These quarrels arose from a dispute over the authority of Sir William
to lay down the law as he pleased.  By virtue of his commission as Vice
Admiral of the Colony he held that he had the right to judge and
condemn naval prizes.  The Collector claimed jurisdiction and when he
refused to deliver a cargo of plunder brought in by a privateer, the
governor blacked his eyes for him.

As for the naval skipper, Captain Short, his experience with the Phips
temper was even more disastrous.  He refused to lend some of his men to
man a cruiser which the governor wished to send after coastwise
pirates.  When next the twain met, Captain Short was first well
threshed,  then bundled off to prison, and from there skipped home to
England in a merchantman.

Such methods of administration had served admirably well to rule those
mutinous dogs of seamen aboard the _Rose_ frigate, but they were
resented in Boston, and after other altercations, Governor Phips found
it necessary to go to England to answer the complaints which had been
piling up in the offices of the Lords of the Council of Trade and
Plantations.  He sailed in his own yacht, a brigantine built in a
Boston shipyard, and we may be sure that he was ready to face his
accusers with a stout heart.

Hutchinson, in his History of Massachusetts, analyzed the trouble as
follows:

"Sir William Phips' rule was short.  His conduct when captain of a ship
of war is represented very much to his advantage; but further talents
were necessary for the good government of a province.  He was of a
benevolent, friendly disposition; at the same time quick and
passionate....

"A vessel arrived from the Bahamas, with a load of fustick, for which
no bond had been given.  Col. Foster, a merchant of Boston, a member of
the Council, and fast friend of the Governor, bought the fustick at
such price that he was loth to give up the bargain.  The Collector
seized the vessel and goods; and upon Foster's representation to the
Governor, he interposed.  There was at that time no Court of Admiralty.
Sir William took a summary way of deciding this case, and sent an order
to the Collector to forbear meddling with the goods, and upon his
refusal to observe orders, the Governor went to the wharf, and after
warm words on both sides, laid hands upon the Collector, but with what
degree of violence was controverted by both.  The Governor prevailed,
and the vessel and goods were taken out of the hands of the Collector.

"There had been a misunderstanding also between the Governor and
Captain Short of the _Nonesuch_ frigate.  In their passage from England
a prize was taken; and Short complained that the Governor had deprived
him of part of his share or legal interest in her.  Whether there were
grounds for it does not appear.  The captains of men of war stationed
in the colonies were in those days required to follow such instructions
as the governors gave them relative to their cruises and the protection
of the trade of the colonies, and the Governor, by his commission, had
power in case of any great crime committed by any of the captains of
men of war, to suspend them, and the next officer was to succeed.

"The Governor required Captain Short to order part of the men belonging
to the _Nonesuch_ upon some service, which I do not find mentioned,
probably to some cruiser, there being many picaroons about the eastern
coasts, but he refused to do it.  This was ill taken by the Governor;
and meeting Captain Short in the street, warm words passed, and at
length the Governor made use of his cane and broke Short's head.  Not
content with this, he committed him to prison.  The right of a governor
to commit by his own warrant had not then been questioned.

"From the prison he removed him to the castle, and from those on board
a merchant bound to London, to be delivered to the order of one of
their Majesties' principal secretaries of state; giving the master a
warrant or authority to do so.  The vessel, by some accident, put into
Portsmouth in New Hampshire.  Sir William who seems to have been
sensible of some irregularity in these proceedings, went to Portsmouth,
required the master of the merchantman to return him the warrant, which
he tore to pieces, and then ordered the cabin of the ship to be opened,
secured Short's chests, and examined the contents.

"Short was prevented going home in this vessel, and went to New York to
take passage from thence for England; but Sir F. Wheeler arriving soon
after at Boston, went for him and carried him home with him.  The next
officer succeeded in the command of the ship, until a new captain
arrived from England.  Short was restored to the command of as good a
ship."

King William refused to depose the famous treasure finder without
hearing what he had to say in his defense, and Sir William stoutly
swore that those whom he had punished got no more than they deserved.
A strong party had been mustered against him, however, and he waged an
uphill fight for vindication until Death, the one foe for whom he did
not think himself a match, took him by the heels and laid him in a
vault beneath the Church of St. Mary Woolnoth, London.  A guide-book of
that city, published in 1708, contained this description of the
memorial placed therein:

"At the east end of the Church of St. Mary Woolnoth, near the northeast
angle, is a pretty white marble monument, adorned with an urn between
two Cupids, the figure of a ship, and also a boat at sea, with persons
in the water; these beheld by a winged eye, all done in basso relieve;
also the seven medals, as that of King William and Queen Mary; some
with Spanish impressions, as the castle, cross-portent, etc. and
likewise the figures of a sea quadrant; cross-staff, and this
inscription:

"'Near this place is interred the Body of Sir William Phips, knight;
who in the year 1687, by his great industry, discovered among the rocks
near the Banks of Bahama on the north side of Hispaniola a Spanish
plate-ship which had been under water 44 years, out of which he took in
gold and silver to the value of L300,000 sterling: and with a fidelity
equal to his conduct, brought it all to London, where it was divided
between himself and the rest of the adventurers.  For which great
service he was knighted by his then Majesty, King James the 2nd, and at
the request of the principal inhabitants of New England, he accepted of
the Government of the Massachusetts, in which he continued up to the
time of his death; and discharged his trust with that zeal for the
interests of the country, and with so little regard to his own private
advantage, that he justly gained the good esteem and affection of the
greatest and best part of the inhabitants of that Colony.

"'He died the 18th of February, 1694, and his lady, to perpetuate his
memory, hath caused this monument to be erected.'"

It is far better to know the man as he was, rough-hewn, hasty,
unlettered, but simple and honest as daylight, than to accept the false
and silly epitaph of Cotton Mather, that "he was a person of so sweet a
temper that they who were most intimately acquainted with him would
commonly pronounce him the Best Conditioned Gentleman in the World."
After he had wrested his fortune from the bottom of the sea in
circumstances splendidly romantic, he used the power which his wealth
gained for him wholly in the service of the people of his own country.

During his last visit to London, when he had grown tired of being a
royal governor, he harked back to his old love, and was planning
another treasure voyage.  "The Spanish wreck was not the only nor the
richest wreck which he knew to be lying under the water.  He knew
particularly that when the ship which had Governor Bobadilla aboard was
cast away, there was, as Peter Martyr says, an entire table of Gold of
Three Thousand Three Hundred and Ten Pounds Weight.  And supposing
himself to have gained sufficient information of the right way to such
a wreck, it was his purpose upon his dismission from his Government,
once more to have gone upon his old Fishing-Trade, upon a mighty shelf
of rocks and bank of sands that lie where he had informed himself."

======================================================================

[Illustration: The oldest existing print of Boston harbor as it
appeared in the time of Sir William Phips, showing the kind of ships in
which he sailed to find his treasure.]

======================================================================

Never was there so haunting a reference to lost treasure as this
mention of that gold table that went down with Governor Bobadilla.  The
words ring like a peal of magic bells.  Alas, the pity of it, that Sir
William Phips did not live to fit out a brave ship and go in quest of
this wondrous treasure, for of all men, then or since, he was the man
to find it.

Bobadilla was that governor of Hispaniola who was sent from Spain in
1500 by Ferdinand and Isabella to investigate the affairs of the colony
as administered by Christopher Columbus.  He put Columbus in chains and
shipped him home, but the great discoverer found a friendly welcome
there, and was sent back for his fourth voyage.  He reached Hispaniola
on the day that Bobadilla was sailing for Spain, in his turn to give
place to a new Governor, Ovando by name.  Bobadilla embarked at San
Domingo in the largest ship of the fleet on board of which was put an
immense amount of gold, the revenue collected for the Crown during his
government, which he hoped might ease the disgrace of his recall.

The Spanish historian, Las Casas, besides other old chroniclers,
mention this solid mass of virgin gold which Peter Martyr affirmed had
been fashioned into a table.  This enormous nugget had been found by an
Indian woman in a brook on the estate of Francisco de Garay and Miguel
Diaz and had been taken by Bobadilla to send to the king.  According to
Las Casas, it weighed three thousand, six hundred castellanos.

When Bobadilla's fleet weighed anchor, Columbus sent a messenger urging
the ships to remain in port because a storm was imminent.  The pilots
and seamen scoffed at the warning, and the galleons stood out from San
Domingo only to meet a tropical hurricane of terrific violence.  Off
the most easterly point of Hispaniola, Bobadilla's ship went down with
all on board.  If this galleon carrying the gold table, besides much
other treasure, had foundered in deep water, it is unlikely that Sir
William Phips would have planned to go in search of her.  If, however,
the ship had been smashed on a reef, he may have "fished up"
information from some other ancient Spaniard as to her exact location.

The secret was buried in his grave and he left no chart to show where
he hoped to find that marvelous treasure, and nobody knows the bearings
of that "mighty shelf of rock and bank of sands that lie where he had
informed himself."



[1] In order to make easier reading, this and the following extracts
from Cotton Mather's narrative are somewhat modernized in respect of
quaint spelling, punctuation, and the use of capitals, although, of
course, the wording is unchanged.




CHAPTER VI

THE BOLD SEA ROGUE, JOHN QUELCH

The Isles of Shoals, lying within sight of Portsmouth Harbor on the New
Hampshire coast, are rich in buried treasure legends and rocky
Appledore is distinguished by the ghost of a pirate, "a pale and very
dreadful specter," whose neck bears the livid mark of the hangman's
noose.  This is a ghost in whose case familiarity has bred contempt
among the matter-of-fact islanders, for they call him "Old Bab" and
employ him to frighten naughty children.  Drake's "Nooks and Corners of
the New England Coast" narrates in the proper melodramatic manner the
best of these traditions.

"Among others to whom it is said these islands were known was the
celebrated Captain Teach, or Blackbeard, as he was often called.  He is
supposed to have buried immense treasure here, some of which has been
dug up and appropriated by the islanders.  On one of his cruises, while
lying off the Scottish coast waiting for a rich trader, he was boarded
by a stranger who came off in a small boat from the shore.  The visitor
demanded to be led before the pirate chief in whose cabin he remained
closeted for some time.  At length Blackbeard appeared on deck with the
stranger whom he introduced as a comrade.  The vessel they were
expecting soon came in sight, and, after a bloody conflict, became the
prize of Blackbeard.  The newcomer had shown such bravery that he was
given command of the captured merchantman.

"The stranger soon proved himself a pirate leader of great skill and
bravery and went cruising off to the southward and the coasts of the
Spanish Main.  At last after his appetite for wealth had been satiated
he sailed back to his native land of Scotland, made a landing, and
returned on board with the insensible body of a beautiful young woman
in his arms.

"The pirate ship then made sail, crossed the Atlantic, and anchored in
the roadstead of the Isles of Shoals.  Here the crew passed the time in
secreting their riches and in carousing.  The commander's portion was
buried on an island apart from the rest.  He roamed over the isles with
his beautiful companion, forgetful, it would seem, of his fearful
trade, until one day a sail was seen standing in for the islands.  All
was now activity on board the pirate; but before getting under way the
outlaw carried the maiden to the island where he had buried his
treasure, and made her take a fearful oath to guard the spot from
mortals until his return, were it not 'til doomsday.

"The strange sail proved to be a warlike vessel in search of the
freebooter.  A long and desperate battle ensued, in which the cruiser
at last silenced her adversary's guns.  The vessels were grappled for a
last struggle when a terrible explosion strewed the sea with the
fragments of both.  Stung to madness by defeat, knowing that if taken
alive a gibbet awaited him, the rover had fired the magazine, involving
friend and foe in a common fate.

"A few mangled wretches succeeded in reaching the islands, only to
perish miserably one by one, from hunger and cold.  The pirate's
mistress remained true to her oath to the last, or until she had
succumbed to want and exposure.  By report, she has been seen more than
once on White Island--a tall shapely figure, wrapped in a long sea
cloak, her head and neck uncovered, except by a profusion of golden
hair.  Her face is described as exquisitely rounded, but pale and still
as marble.  She takes her stand on the verge of a low, projecting
point, gazing fixedly out upon the ocean in an attitude of intense
expectation.  A forager race of fishermen avouched that her ghost was
doomed to haunt those rocks until the last trump shall sound, and that
the ancient graves to be found on the islands were tenanted by
Blackbeard's men."

It is more probable that whatever treasure may be hidden among the
Isles of Shoals was hidden there by the shipmates of a great scamp of a
pirate named John Quelch who fills an interesting page in the early
history of the Massachusetts Colony.  In proof of this assertion is the
entry in one of the old records of Salem, written in the year 1704:

"Major Stephen Sewall, Captain John Turner, and 40 volunteers embark in
a shallop and Fort Pinnace after Sunset to go in search of some Pirates
who sailed from Gloucester in the morning.  Major Sewall brought into
Salem a Galley, Captain Thomas Lowrimore, on board of which he had
captured some Pirates, and some of their Gold at the Isle of Shoals.
Major Sewall carries the Pirates to Boston under a strong guard.
Captain Quelch and five of his crew are hung.  About 13 of the ship's
Company remain under sentence of death and several more are cleared."

By no means all of the bloodstained gold of Quelch was recovered by
this expedition which went to the Isles of Shoals and it is more likely
to be hidden there to this day than anywhere else.  Quelch was a bold
figure of a pirate worthy to be named in the company of the most
dashing of his profession in the era of Kidd, Bradish, Bellamy, and
Low.  His story is worth the telling because it is, in a way, a sequel
of the tragedy of Captain Kidd.

In 1703, the brigantine _Charles_, of about eighty tons, owned by
leading citizens and merchants of Boston, was fitted out as a privateer
to go cruising against the French off the coasts of Arcadia and
Newfoundland.  On July 13th of that year, her commander, Captain David
Plowman, received his commission from Governor Dudley of the province
to sail in pursuit of the Queen's enemies and pirates, with other
customary instructions.  There was some delay in shipping a crew, and
on the first of August the _Charles_ was riding off Marblehead when
Captain Plowman was taken ill.  He sent a letter to his owners, stating
that he was unable to take the vessel to sea, and suggesting that they
come on board next day and "take some speedy care in saving what we
can."

The owners went to Marblehead, but the captain was too ill to confer
with them.  He was able, however, to write again, this time urging them
to have the vessel carried to Boston, and the arms and stores landed in
order to "prevent embezzlement," and advising against sending the
_Charles_ on her cruise under a new commander, adding the warning that
"it will not do with these people," meaning the crew then on board.

Before the owners could take any measures to safeguard their property,
the brigantine had made sail and was standing out to sea, stolen by her
crew.  The helpless captain was locked in his cabin, and the new
Commander on the quarter-deck was John Quelch who had planned and led
the mutiny.  Instead of turning to the northward, the bow of the
_Charles_ was pointed for the South Atlantic and the track of the
Spanish trade where there was rich pirating.  Somewhere in the Gulf
Stream, poor Captain Plowman was dragged on deck and tossed overboard
by order of Quelch.

A flag was then hoisted, called "Old Roger," described as having "in
the middle of it an Anatomy (skeleton) with an Hourglass in one hand,
and a dart in the Heart with 3 drops of Blood proceeding from it in the
other."  When the coast of Brazil was reached, Quelch and his men drove
a thriving trade.  Between November 15, 1703, and February 17, 1704,
they boarded and took nine vessels, of which five were brigantines, and
one a large ship carrying twelve guns.  All these craft flew the
Portugese flag, and Portugal was an ally of England by virtue of a
treaty which had been signed at Lisbon on May 16, 1703.  What became of
the crews of these hapless vessels was not revealed, but the plunder
included salt, sugar, rum, beer, rice, flour, cloth, silk, one hundred
weight of gold dust, gold and silver coin to the value of a thousand
pounds, two negro boys, great guns, small arms, ammunition, sails, and
cordage.  One of the largest of the brigantines was kept to serve as a
tender.

Two weeks after the _Charles_ had taken French leave from Marblehead,
her owners, surmising that she had been headed toward the West Indies,
persuaded Governor Dudley to take action, and letters were sent to
officials in various islands instructing them to be on the look-out for
the runaway privateer and to seize her crew as pirates.  Quelch was a
wily rogue, however, and kept clear of all pursuit, nor was anything
more heard of the _Charles_ until with extraordinary audacity he came
sailing back to New England in the following May and dropped anchor off
Marblehead.  His men quickly scattered alongshore, and gave out the
story which he had cooked up for them, that Captain Plowman had died of
his illness while at sea, that Quelch had been obliged to take command,
and that they had recovered a great deal of treasure from the wreck of
a Spanish galleon.

The yarn was fishy, the men talked too much in their cups, and the
owners of the _Charles_ were not satisfied with Quelch's glib
explanation.  They laid information against him in writing, and the
vessel was searched, the plunder indicating that the lawless crew had
been lifting the goods of subjects of the King of Portugal.  The first
mention of the affair in the _Boston News-Letter_ was in the issue for
the week of May 15, 1704:

"Arrived at Marblehead, Captain Quelch in the Brigantine that Captain
Plowman went out in.  Is said to come from New Spain and have made a
good Voyage."

Quelch was a good deal more of a man than Captain Kidd who skulked
homeward, hiding his treasure, parleying with Governor Bellomont at
long range, afraid to come to close quarters.  A strutting, swaggering,
villain was John Quelch, daring to beard the lion in his den, trusting
to his ability to deceive with the authorities.  To have run away with
a privateer, thrown the captain overboard, filled the hold with loot,
and then sailed back to Marblehead was no ordinary achievement.
However, this truly artistic piracy was so coldly welcomed that a week
after his arrival had been chronicled, he was in jail and the following
proclamation issued:

"By the Honourable THOMAS POVEY, Esq., Lieut. Governour and Commander
in Chief, for the time being, of Her Majesties Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England.


A PROCLAMATION

Whereas, John Quelch, late Commander of the Brigantine _Charles_ and
Company to her belonging, Viz, John Lambert, John Miller, John
Clifford, John Dorothy, James Parrot, Charles James, William Whiting,
John Pitman, John Templeton, Benjamin Perkins, William Wiles, Richard
Lawrance, Erasmus Peterson, John King, Charles King, Isaac Johnson,
Nicholas Lawson, Daniel Chevalle, John Way, Thomas Farrington, Matthew
Primer, Anthony Holding, William Raynor, John Quittance, John Harwood,
William Jones, Denis Carter, Nicholas Richardson, James Austin, James
Pattison, Joseph Hutnot, George Pierse, George Norton, Gabriel Davis,
John Breck, John Carter, Paul Giddens, Nicholas Dunbar, Richard
Thurbar, Daniel Chuly, and others; Have lately imported a considerable
quantity of Gold dust, and some Bar and Coin'd Gold, which they are
Violently suspected to have gotten and obtained by Felony and Piracy
from some of Her Majesties Friends and Allies, and have Imported and
Shared the same among themselves without any Adjudication or
Condemnation thereof to be lawful Prizes; The said Commander and some
others being apprehended and in Custody, the rest are absconded and
fled from Justice.

"I have therefore thought fit, by and with the advice of Her Majesties
Council, strictly to Command and Require all Officers Civil and
Military, and others Her Majesties loving Subjects to Apprehend and
Seize the said Persons, or any of them, whom they may know or find, and
them secure and their Treasure, and bring them before one of the
Council, or next Justice of the Peace, in order to their being safely
conveyed to Boston, to be Examined and brought to Answer what shall be
Objected against them, on Her Majesties behalf.

"And all Her Majesties Subjects, and others, are hereby strictly
forbidden to entertain, harbour, or conceal any of the said Persons, or
their Treasure, or to convey away, or in any manner further the Escape
of any of them, on pain of being proceeded against with utmost Severity
of Law, as accessories and partakers with them in their Crime.

Given at the Council Chamber in Boston the 24th Day of May in the Third
Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lady ANNE, by the Grace of GOD of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, QUEEN, Defender of the Faith,
etc.  Annoque Domi.  1704.

T. POVEY.

  By Order of the Lieut.
  Governor and Council,
    Isaac Addington, Secr.
        GOD Save The QUEEN."


The editor of _The Boston News-Letter_, commenting on the foregoing
fulmination, saw fit to qualify his previous mention of Quelch's
voyage, and announced under date of May 27:

"Our last gave an Account of Captain Quelch's being said to Arrive from
N. Spain, having made a good Voyage, but by the foregoing Proclamation
'tis uncertain whence they came, and too palpably evident they have
committed Piracies, either upon her Majesties Subjects or Allies....
William Whiting lyes sick, like to dye, not yet examined.  There are
two more of them sick at Marble head, and another in Salem Gaol, and
James Austin imprisoned at Piscataqua."

======================================================================

[Illustration: An ancient map of Jamaica showing the haunts of the
pirates and the track of the treasure galleons.]

======================================================================

As soon as Governor Dudley returned to Boston, a few days later, he
issued a proclamation to reinforce that of the Lieutenant Governor, and
one paragraph indicated that the case of John Quelch was moving swiftly
toward the gallows.

"And it being now made Evident by the Confession of some of the said
Persons apprehended and Examined, that the Gold and Treasure by them
Imported was robb'd and taken from the Subject of the Crown of
Portugal, on which they have also acted divers Villainous Murders, I
have thought fit," etc.

It was believed that several of the crew had scampered off with a large
amount of the treasure, for Governor Dudley laid great stress on
overhauling sundry of them, mentioned by name, "with their Treasure
concealed."  In his speech at the opening of the General Court on June
1, he stated:

"The last week has discovered a very notorious piracy, committed upon
her Majesties Allies, the Portugal, on the coast of Brazil, by Quelch
and company, in the _Charles Galley_; for the discovery of which all
possible methods have been used, and the severest process against those
vile men shall be speedily taken, that the Province be not thereby
disparaged, as they have been heretofore; and I hope every good man
will do his duty according to the several Proclamations to discover the
pirates and their treasure, agreable to the Acts of Parliament in that
case made and provided."

Dudley was as energetic in pursuit of the runaway pirates as Bellomont
had been, and the _News-Letter_ recorded his activities in this wise:

"Warrants are issued forth to seize and apprehend Captain Larimore in
the _Larimore Galley_, who is said to have Sailed from Cape Anne with 9
or 11 Pirates of Captain Quelch's Company."

"There is two more of the Pirates seized this week and in Custody viz.
Benjamin Perkins, and John Templeton."

"Rhode Island, June 9.  The Honorable Samuel Cranston, Esq., Governour
of Her Majesties Colony of Rhode Island, etc., Having received a
Proclamation Emitted by His Excellency Joseph Dudley, Esq. General and
Gov. in Chief in and over Her Majesties Province of the Mass. Bay,
etc., for Seizing and Apprehending the late Company of Pirates
belonging to the Briganteen _Charles_, of whom John Quelch was
Commander, By and with the advice of the Deputy Governour and Council
Present, issued forth his further Proclamation to Seize and Apprehend
said Pirates, or any of their Treasure, and to bring them before one of
the Council, or next Justice of the Peace, in order to be conveyed to
the town of Newport, to be examined and proceeded with according to
Law.  Commanding the Sheriff to Publish this and His Excellencies
Proclamation in the Town of New-port, and in other Towns of the Colony.
Strictly forbidding all Her Majesties Subjects and others to conceal
any of them or their treasure, or convey and further their escape, on
pain of being proceeded against with utmost severity of law."

"Marblehead, June 9.  The Honorable Samuel Sewall, Nathanael Byfield,
and Paul Dudley, Esqrs.  came to this place yesterday, in obedience to
His Excellency the Governour, his Order for the more effectual
discovering and Seizing the Pirates lately belonging to the Briganteen
_Charles_, John Quelch Commander, with their Treasure.  They made Salem
in their way, where Samuel Wakefield the Water Baily informed them of a
rumour that two of Quelch's Company were lurking at Cape Anne, waiting
for a Passage off the Coast.  The Commissioners made out a Warrant to
Wakefield to Search for them, and dispatched him away on Wednesday
night.  And having gain'd intelligence this Morning that a certain
number of them well Armed, were at Cape Anne, designing to go off in
the _Larimore Galley_, then at Anchor in the Harbour, they immediately
sent Men from the several adjacent Towns by Land and Water to prevent
their escape, and went thither themselves, to give necessary orders
upon the place."

"Gloucester, upon Cape Anne, June 9.  The Commissioners for Seizing the
Pirates and their Treasure arrived here this day, were advised that the
_Larimore Galley_ Sail'd in the Morning Eastward, and that a Boat was
seen to go off from the head of the Cape, near Snake Island, full of
men, supposed to be the Pirates.  The Commissioners, seeing the
Government mock'd by Captain Larimore and his officers, resolved to
send after them.  Major Stephen Sewall who attended with a Fishing
Shallop, and the Fort Pinnace, offered to go in pursuit of them, and
Captain John Turner, Mr. Robert Brisco, Capt. Knight, and several other
good men voluntarily accompanied him, to the Number of 42 men who rowed
out of the Harbour after Sun-sett, being little Wind."

"Salem, June 11.  This afternoon Major Sewall brought into this Port
the _Larimore Galley_ and Seven Pirates, viz., Erasmus Peterson,
Charles James, John Carter, John Pitman, Francis King, Charles King,
John King, whom he with his Company Surprized and Seized at the Isles
of Sholes the 10th. Instant viz. four of them on Board the _Larimore
Galley_, and three on shoar on Starr Island, being assisted by John
Hinckes and Thomas Phipps, Esqrs., two of her Majesties Justices of New
Hampshire, who were happily there, together with the Justices and the
Captain of the Place.  He also seized 45 Ounces and Seven Penny weight
of Gold of the said Pirates.  Captain Thomas Larimore, Joseph Wells,
Lieutenant, and Daniel Wormall, Master, and the said Pirates are
Secured in our Gaol."

"Gloucester, June 12.  Yesterday Major Sewall passed by this place with
the _Larimore Galley_ and Shallop _Trial_ standing for Salem, and
having little wind, set our men ashore on the Eastern Point, giving of
them notice that William Jones and Peter Roach, two of the Pirates had
mistook their way, and were still left at the Cape, with strict charge
to search for them, which our Towns People performed very
industriously.  Being strangers and destitute of all Succours, they
surrendered themselves this Afternoon, and were sent to Salem Prison."

"Boston, June 17.  On the 13th. Instant, Major Sewall attended with a
strong guard brought to Town the above mentioned Pirates and Gold he
had seized and gave His Excellency a full Account of his Procedure in
Seizing them.  The Prisoners were committed to Gaol in order to a
Tryal, and the Gold delivered to the Treasurer and Committee appointed
to receive the same.  The service of Major Sewall and Company was very
well Accepted and Rewarded by the Governour.

"His Excellency was pleased on the 13 Currant to open the High Court of
Admiralty for trying Capt. John Quelch, late Commander of the
Briganteen _Charles_, and Company for Piracy, who were brought to the
Barr, and the Articles exhibited against them read.  They all pleaded
Not Guilty, excepting three, viz. Matthew Primer, John Clifford, and
James Parrot, who were reserved for Evidences and are in her Majesties
Mercy.  The Prisoners moved for Council, and His Excellency assigned
them Mr. James Meinzes.  The Court was adjourned to the 16th.  When met
again Capt. Quelch preferr'd a Petition to His Excellency and Honorable
Court, craving longer time which was granted till Monday Morning at
Nine of the Clock, when said Court is to sit again in order to their
Tryal."

Newspaper reporting was primitive in the Year of Our Lord, 1704, and we
are denied further information of the merry chase after the fleeing
pirates and their treasure.  One would like to know more of that
adventure at the Isles of Shoals and what the fugitives were doing "on
shoar" at Starr Island.  The trial of Quelch and his companions was
recorded with much more detail because it had certain important and
memorable aspects.  It will be recalled that Kidd and his men were sent
to England for trial by Bellomont for the reason that the colonial laws
made no provision for executing the death sentence in the case of a
convicted pirate.  The difficulties and delays and the large expense
incident to the Kidd proceedings were among the considerations which
moved Parliament, by an act passed in the reign of William III, to
confer upon the Crown authority to issue commissions for the trial of
pirates by Courts of Admiralty out of the realm.  Such a commission was
finally sent to Lord Bellomont for the trial of pirates in
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island.  Another document of
the same kind, granting him this power for New York, arrived there
after his death.

These rights were confirmed by Queen Anne, and in her instructions to
Governor Dudley she expressed "her will and pleasure that in all
matters relating to the prosecution of pirates, he govern himself
according to the act and commission aforesaid."  The trial of Quelch
was the first to be held by virtue of these authorizations, and
therefore the first capital proceedings against pirates in the New
England Colonies.  A special court was convened, and an imposing
tribunal it was, comprising the Governors and Lieutenant Governors of
the Provinces of Massachusetts Bay, and New Hampshire, the Judge of
Vice Admiralty in each, the Chief Justices of the Superior Court of
Judicature, the Secretary of the Province, Members of the Council of
Massachusetts Bay, and the Collector of Customs for New England.

The sessions were held in the Star Tavern, on the present Hanover
Street of Boston, and Quelch was tried first, "being charged with nine
several articles of piracy and murder." He was very expeditiously found
guilty and sentenced to death, after which nineteen of his company, in
two batches, were dealt the same verdict.  From this wholesale
punishment only two were excepted, William Whiting, "the witnesses
proving no matter of fact upon him, said Whiting being sick all the
voyage and not active," and John Templeton, "a servant about fourteen
years of age, and not charged with any action."  These were acquitted.

There are preserved only two copies of a broadside published in Boston
in July of 1704 which quaintly portrays the strenuous efforts made to
save the souls of the condemned pirates who must have been men of
uncommonly stout endurance to stand up under the sermons with which
they were bombarded.  This little pamphlet may serve as a warning to
venturesome boys of the twentieth century who yearn to go a-pirating
and to bury treasure.


An Account of the Behaviour and Last Dying SPEECHES

Of the Six Pirates that were Executed on Charles River, Boston side, On
Fryday, June 30th.  1704.  Viz.

Captain John Quelch, John Lambert, Christopher Scudamore, John Miller,
Erasmus Peterson, and Peter Roach.

The Ministers of the Town had used more than ordinary Endeavours to
Instruct the Prisoners, and bring them to Repentance.  There were
Sermons Preached in their hearing Every Day; And Prayers daily made
with them.  And they were Catechised; and they had many occasional
Exhortations.  And nothing was left that could be done for their Good.

On Fryday, the 30th of June, 1704, Pursuant to Orders in the Dead
Warrant, the aforesaid Pirates were guarded from the Prison in Boston
by Forty Musketeers, Constables of the Town, the Provost Marshal and
his Officers, etc, with two Ministers who took great pains to prepare
them for the last Article of their Lives.  Being allowed to walk on
foot through the Town, to Scarlet's Wharf: where the Silver Oar being
carried before them, they went by Water to the Place of Execution being
crowded and thronged on all sides by Multitudes of Spectators.  The
Ministers then spoke to the Malefactors to this Effect:

"We have told you often, yea, we have told you weeping, that you have
by Sin undone yourselves; That you were born Sinners; That you have
lived Sinners; That your Sins have been many and mighty; and that the
Sins for which you are now to Dy, are of no Common aggravation.  We
have told you that there is a Saviour for Sinners, and we have shewn
you how to commit yourselves into his Saving and Healing Hands.  We
have told you that if He Save you He will give you as hearty Repentance
for all your Sins, and we have shewn you how to Express that
Repentance.  We have told you what Marks of Life must be desired for
your Souls, that you may Safely appear before the Judgment Seat of God.
Oh!  That the means used for your Good may by the Grace of God be made
Effectual.  We can do no more, but leave you in His Merciful Hands."

When they were gone upon the Stage, and Silence was Commanded, One of
the Ministers Prayed as followeth:

"Oh!  Thou most Great and Glorious LORD!  Thou art a Righteous and a
Terrible God.  It is a righteous and an Holy Law that thus hast given
unto all, but what would soon have done the worst things in the World.
Oh!  The Free-Grace!  Oh!  The Riches of that Grace, which has made all
the Difference!  But now, we cry us.  To break that Good Law, and Sin
against thy Infinite Majesty can be no little Evil.  Thy Word is always
True, and very Particular, that Word of thine which has told us and
warned us, EVIL PURSUETH SINNERS.  We have seen it, we have seen it.
We have before our Eyes a dreadful Demonstration of it.  Oh!  Sanctify
unto us, a Sight that has in it so much of the Terror of the Lord!

"Here is a Number of men that have been very great Sinners, and that
are to Dy before their Time, for their being wicked overmuch.

"... But now we cry mightily to Heaven, we Lift up our Cries to the God
of all Grace, for the Perishing Souls which are just now going to
Expire under the Stroke of Justice, before our Eyes.  We Mourn, we
Mourn, that upon some of them at least, we do unto this minute see no
better Symptoms.  But, Oh! is there not yet a Room for Sovereign Grace
to be display'd, in their Conversion and Salvation?  They Perish if
they do not now Sincerely turn from Sin to God, and give themselves up
to the Lord JESUS CHRIST; They Righteously and Horribly Perish!  And
yet, without Influences from above, they can do none of those things
which must be done if they do not perish.  Oh! let us beg it of our God
that He would not be so Provoked at their Multiplied and Prodigious
Impieties, and at their obstinate Hardness under means of Good formerly
afforded them, as to withhold those Influences from them.  We cry to
thee, O God of all Grace, That thou wouldst not Suffer them to continue
in the Gall of Bitterness and Bond of Iniquity, and in the Possession
of the Devil.  Oh!  Knock off the Chains of Death which are upon their
Souls; Oh!  Snatch the prey out of the Hands of the Terrible.

"... Discover to them, the only Saviour of their Souls.  Oh!  Dispose
them, Oh!  Assist them to give the Consent of their Souls unto His
Wonderful Proposals.  Let them dy Renouncing all Dependence on any
Righteousness of their own.  Alas, what can they have of their own to
Depend upon!  As a Token and Effect of their having Accepted the
Righteousness of God, Let them heartily Repent of all their Sins
against thee, and Abhor and cast up every Morsel of their Iniquity.
Oh!  Let them not go out of the World raging and raving against the
Justice of God and Man.  And whatever part of the Satanick Image is yet
remaining on their Souls, Oh!  Efface it!  Let them now dy in such a
State and such a Frame as may render them fit to appear before God the
Judge of all.  What shall plead for them?

"Great GOD grant that all the Spectators may get Good by the horrible
Spectacle that is now before them!  Let all the People hear and fear,
and let no more any such Wickedness be done as has produced this woeful
Spectacle.  And let all the People beware how they go on in the ways of
Sin, and in the paths of the Destroyer, after so Solemn Warnings.

"Oh! but shall our _Sea-faring Tribe_ on this Occasion be in a Singular
manner affected with the Warnings of God!  Lord, May those our dear
Bretheren be Saved from the Temptations which do so threaten them!  Oh!
Let them not Abandon Themselves to Profanity, to Swearing, to Cursing,
to Drinking, to Lewdness, to a cursed Forgetfulness of their Maker, and
of the End for which He made them!  Oh!  Let them not be abandoned of
God unto those Courses that will hasten them to a Damnation that
slumbers not!  Oh!  Let the men hear the Lord exceedingly, We Pray
thee!  Let the Condition of the Six or Seven men whom they now see
Dying for their Wickedness upon the Sea be Sanctified unto them...."

They then severally Spoke, Viz.

--I--_Captain John Quelch_.  The last Words he spoke to one of the
Ministers at his going up the Stage were, _I am not afraid of Death.  I
am not afraid of the Gallows, but I am afraid of what follows; I am
afraid of a Great God, and a Judgment to Come_.  But he afterwards
seem'd to brave it out too much against that fear; also when on the
Stage first he pulled off his Hat, and bowed to the Spectators, and not
concerned, nor behaving himself so much like a Dying man as some would
have done.  The Ministers had in the Way to his Execution much desired
him to Glorify God at his Death, by bearing a due Testimony against the
Sins that had ruined him, and for the ways of Religion which he had
much neglected; yet now being called upon to speak what he had to say,
it was but this much.  _What I have to say is this.  I desire to be
informed for what I am here.  I am Condemned only upon Circumstances.
I forgive all the World.  So the Lord be Merciful to my Soul_.  When
_Lambert_ was Warning the Spectators to beware of Bad Company, _Quelch_
joyning _They should also take care how they brought Money into New
England, to be Hanged for it!_

--II--_John Lambert_.  He appeared much hardened, and pleaded much on
his Innocency; He desired all men to beware of Bad Company; he seem'd
in a great Agony near his Execution; he called much and frequently on
Christ for Pardon of Sin, that God Almighty would save his innocent
Soul; he desired to forgive all the World.  His last words were, _Lord,
forgive my Soul!  Oh, receive me into Eternity!  Blessed Name of
Christ, receive my Soul_.

--III--_Christopher Scudamore_.  He appeared very Penitent since his
Condemnation, was very diligent to improve his time going to, and at
the place of Execution.

--IV--_John Miller_.  He seem'd much concerned, and complained of a
great Burden of Sins to answer for; expressing often _Lord, what shall
I do to be Saved_!

--V--_Erasmus Peterson_.  He cryed of injustice done him, and said _It
is very hard for so many lives to be taken away for a little Gold_.  He
often said his Peace was made with God, and his Soul would be with God,
yet extream hard to forgive those he said had wronged him.  He told the
Executioner, _he was a strong man, and Prayed to be put out of misery
as soon as possible_.

--VI--_Peter Roach_.  He seem'd little concerned, and said but little
or nothing at all.  Francis King was also brought to the place of
Execution but Repriev'd.

Printed for and Sold by Nicholas Boone, at his Shop near the Old
Meeting-House in Boston.  1704.


ADVERTISEMENT.

There is now in the Press and will speedily be Published: The
Arraignment, Tryal and Condemnation of Captain John Quelch, and others
of his Company etc.  for sundry Piracies, Robberies and Murder
committed upon the Subjects of the King of Portugal, Her Majesties
Allie, on the Coast of Brasil etc.  Who upon full Evidence were found
guilty at the Court-House in Boston on the 13th of June 1704.  With the
Arguments of the Queen's Council and Council for the Prisoners, upon
the Act for the more effectual Suppression of Piracy.  With an account
of the Ages of the several Prisoners, and the Places where they were
Born.


The _News-Letter_ was less inclined to vouch for the pious inclinations
of these poor wretches, and gravely stated that "notwithstanding all
the great labour and pains taken by the Reverend Ministers of the Town
of Boston, ever since they were first Seized and brought to Town, both
before and since their Tryal and Condemnation, to instruct, admonish,
preach, and pray for them: yet as they had led a wicked and vicious
life, so to appearance they dyed very obdurately and impenitently,
hardened in their Sins."

Be that as it may, the figure of bold John Quelch on the gallows,
bowing to the spectators, hat in hand, was that of no whimpering
coward, and one admires him for that grimly sardonic touch of humor as
he warned the silent, curious multitude to take care "how they brought
money into New England, to be hanged for it."  Among these devout and
somber Pilgrims and Puritans who Listened to that singularly moving
prayer, tremendous in its sincerity, were more than a few who were
bringing money into New England by means of trade in rum and negroes,
or very quietly buying and selling the merchandise fetched home by
pirates who were lucky enough to keep clear of the law.  The
Massachusetts colonists dearly loved to make public parade of a rogue
caught in the act, and to see six pirates hanged at once was a rare
holiday indeed.

These only of the number convicted and condemned were hanged.  All the
others were pardoned a year later by Queene Anne at the recommendation
of Governor Dudley, with the exhortation "that as they had now new
Lives given them, they should be new men, and be very faithful and
diligent in the Service of Her Majesty; who might as easily and justly
have ordered their Execution this day as sent their Pardon."  As one
way of turning pirates to some useful account, these forgiven rogues
were promptly drafted into the royal navy as able seamen, and doubtless
made excellent food for powder.

Although a large part of that hundred weight of gold was successfully
concealed by Quelch and his comrades, either buried at the Isles of
Shoals, or otherwise spirited away, enough of it was recovered to
afford a division of the spoils among various officials in a manner so
suggestive of petty graft as to warrant the conclusion that piracy was
not entirely a maritime trade in Puritan Boston.  Every man Jack of
them who had anything whatever to do with catching or keeping or
hanging Quelch and his fellows poked his fingers into the bag of gold.
It seems like very belated muck-raking to fish up the document that
tells in detail what became of so much of the Quelch treasure as fell
into the greedy hands of the authorities, but here are the tell-tale
figures:

"To Stephen North, who kept the Star Tavern in which the trial was
held, for entertainment of the Commissioners during the sitting of the
Court of Admiralty, and for Witnesses, Twenty-eight pounds, Eleven
shillings, and six pence.

"To Lieut. Gov. Usher, Expenses in securing and returning of James
Austin's Gold from the Province of New Hampshire, Three pounds, ten
shillings.

"To Richard Jesse, Sheriffe of New Hampshire and his Officers and under
keeper, for charge of keeping the said Austin, expenses in his
sickness, and charge of conveying him into this Province, Nine pounds,
five shillings.

"To Mr. James Menzies of Council for the Prisoners on their Tryal, as
signed by the Commissioners, Twenty Pounds.

"To Henry Franklyn, Marshal of the Admiralty for the Gibbet, Guards,
and execution, Twenty-nine pounds, nineteen shillings.  Later forty
shillings added to Thomas Barnard for erecting the gibbet.

"To Samuel Wakefield, Deputy Marshal of the Admiralty, for charges in
apprehending several of the said Pirates, Four Pounds, five shillings
and six pence.

"To Mr. Apthorp and Mr. Jesse, two of the Constables of Boston for
their service about apprehending the said Pirates, forty shillings.

"To the Constables of the Several Towns betwixt Bristol and Boston for
apprehending and conveying of Christopher Scudamore, two pounds,
eighteen shillings.

"To Captain Edward Brattle, charges on a Negro boy imported by the said
Pirates, Twenty five shillings.

"To Andrew Belcher, Esq., charges for Clothing of the Witnesses sent to
England with Larrimore and Wells, charged as accessories, seven pounds,
eighteen shillings.

"To Paul Dudley, Esq., the Queen's Advocate for the prosecution of the
said Pirates, preparing the said Tryal for the press, supervising of
the same, and for his service relating to Captain Larrimore, in the
whole, Thirty-six pounds.

"To Thomas Newton, Esq. of Council for the Queen in the said Tryal, ten
pounds.

"To Mr. John Valentine, Register, for his service on the Tryal and for
transcribing them to be transmitted to her Majesty's High Court of
Admiralty in England, Thirteen pounds.

"To Mr. Sheriffe Dyer, for his service relating to the said Prisoners,
Five pounds.

"To Wm. Clarke of Boston, for Casks, shifting and landing the Sugar and
other things piratically and feloniously obtained by Captain Quelch and
Company, and for storage of them, Thirteen pounds.

"To Daniel Willard, Keeper of the Prison in Boston, toward the charge
of feeding and keeping of the said Pirates, Thirty pounds.

"To Andrew Belcher, the Commissary-General, an additional sum of five
pounds nine shillings and six pence for necessary clothing supplied to
some of the Pirates in prison.

"To Major James Sewall for his pursuit and apprehension of seven of the
Pirates, and for the gratification of himself, Captain Turner, and
other officers, one hundred and thirty-two pounds, five shillings."

======================================================================

[Illustration: The town and bay of Tobermory, Island of Mull.  The
treasure galleon is supposed to have gone down in the place indicated
by the cross at the right hand side of the photograph.]

======================================================================

The commissioners, Sewall, Byfield and Paul Dudley, received for their
expenses and services, twenty-five pounds, seven shillings, and ten
pence.

Finally, there were given to the captains of the several companies of
militia in the town for Boston, "for their charges and expenses on
Guards and Watches on the Pirates during their Imprisonment,
Twenty-seven pounds, sixteen shillings, and three pence: to Captain
Tuthill, for his assistance to secure and bring about the Vessel and
goods from Marblehead, five pounds; to Mr. Jeremiah Allen, the
Treasurer's bookkeeper, for his care and service about the said Gold
and goods, five pounds; to Constable Apthorp and Jesse, for their
services, a further allowance of three pounds."

The amount of the "royal bounty" given the Governor as his share of the
pirates' booty, is not recorded.  If the belief of those of their
contemporaries who best know the Dudleys may be relied on, the fees and
emoluments officially awarded them were by no means the extent of the
profits from their dealings with the pirates and their treasure.  When
Cotton Mather quarreled with Governor Dudley a few years later he did
not hesitate to intimate this charge pretty broadly in the following
passage in his memorial on Dudley's administration:

"There have been odd _Collusions_ with the Pyrates of Quelch's Company,
of which one instance is, That there was extorted the sum of about
Thirty Pounds from some of the crew for liberty to walk at certain
times in the prison yard.  And this liberty having been allowed for two
or three days unto them, they were again confined to their former
wretched circumstances."




CHAPTER VII

THE ARMADA GALLEON OF TOBERMORY BAY

Between the western Highlands of Scotland and the remote, cloudy
Hebrides lies the large island of Mull on a sound of that name.  Its
bold headlands are crowned with the ruins of gray castles that were
once the strongholds of the clans of the MacLeans and the MacDonalds.
Along these shores and waters one generation after another of kilted
fighting men, savage as red Indians, raided and burned and slew in
feuds whose memories are crowded with tragedy and romance.  Near where
Mull is washed by the Atlantic and the Sound opens toward the
thoroughfares of the deep-sea shipping is the pleasant town of
Tobermory, which in the Gaelic means Mary's Well.  The bay that it
faces is singularly beautiful, almost landlocked, and of a depth
sufficient to shelter a fleet.

Into this Bay of Tobermory there sailed one day a great galleon of
Spain, belonging to that mighty Armada which had been shattered and
driven in frantic flight by English seamen with hearts of oak under
Drake, Hawkins, Howard, Seymour, and Martin Frobisher, names to make
the blood beat faster even now.  The year was 1588, in the reign of
Elizabeth, long, long, ago.  This fugitive galleon, aforetime so tall
and stately and ornate, was racked and leaking, her painted sails in
tatters, her Spanish sailors sick, weary, starved, after escaping from
the English Channel and faring far northward around the stormy Orkneys.
Many of her sister ships had crashed ashore on the Irish coast while
the surviving remnant of this magnificent flotilla wallowed forlornly
home.  Seeking provisions, repairs, respite from the terrors of the
implacable ocean the galleon _Florencia_ dropped anchor in Tobermory
Bay, and there she laid her bones.

With her, it is said, was lost a great store of treasure in gold and
plate, and ever since 1641, for more than two and a half centuries, the
search for these riches has been carried on at intervals.  More than
likely, if you should go in one of Donald MacBrayne's steamers through
the Sound of Mull next summer, and a delightful excursion it is, you
would find an up-to-date suction dredge and a corps of divers, employed
by the latest syndicate to finance the treasure hunt, ransacking the
mud of Tobermory Bay in the hope of finding the Spanish gold of the
_Florencia_.  Many thousands have been vainly spent in the quest, but
the lure of lost treasure has a fascination of its own, and after all
the failure of Scotch and English seekers, American enterprise and
capital have now taken hold of this romantic task.

With the history of the _Florencia_ galleon and her treasure is
intimately interwoven the stirring chronicle of the deeds of the
MacLeans of Mull and the MacDonalds of Islay and Skye.  Out of the
echoing past, the fanfare of Spanish trumpets is mingled with the skirl
of the pipes, and the rapier of Toledo flashes beside the claymore of
the Highlanders.  The story really begins long before the doomed
galleon sought refuge in Tobermory Bay.  There were island chieftains
of the Clan MacLean, busy at cutting the throats of their enemies, as
far remote in time as the thirteenth century, but their turbulent
pedigrees need not concern our narrative until the warlike figure of
Lachlan Mo'r MacLean, "Big Lachlan," steps into its pages in the year
of 1576.

It was then that he came of age and set out from the Court of James VI
at Edinburgh, where he had been brought up, to claim his inherited
estates of Mull.  His wicked step-father, Hector, met him in the castle
of Duart whose stout walls and battlements still loom not far from
Tobermory and tried to set him aside with false and foolish words.  The
astute youth perceived that if he were to come into his own, he must be
up and doing, wherefore he speedily mustered friends and led them into
Castle Duart by night.  They carried this scheming step-father to the
island of Coll and there beheaded him, which made Lachlan's title clear
to the lands of his ancestors.

The next to mistake the mettle of young Lachlan Mo'r was no less than
Colin Campbell, sixth Earl of Argyll, head of a family very powerful in
the Highlands even to this day.  He was for seizing the estate by force
after plotting to no purpose, and Angus MacDonald of Dunyweg was
persuaded to help him with several hundred fighting men.  Thus began
the feud between the MacLeans and MacDonalds which a few years later
was to involve that great galleon _Florencia_ of the Armada.  Argyll
and his force wasted the lands of Lachlan with fire and sword, and
besieged one of his strongholds with twelve hundred followers.

War thus begun was waged without mercy, and one bloody episode followed
on the heels of another.  At the head of his clansmen, Lachlan swept
into Argyle's country and made him cry quits.  This was a large
achievement, and the spirited young Lord of Duart was hailed as a
Highland chief worthy of the king's favor.  He went to court, was
flattered by the great men there, and became the hero of as pretty and
gallant a romance as heart could wish.  The king arranged that he
should marry the daughter of the powerful Earl of Athol, and Lachlan
could not say his sovereign nay.  The contract arranged, he started for
Mull to make ready for the wedding, but chanced to visit on the way
William Cunningham, Earl of Glencairn, at his castle overlooking the
Clyde.

Cards were played to while away the evening, and Lachlan's partner was
one of the daughters of the host.  It so happened that the game was
changed and the players again cut for partners.  At this another
daughter, the fair Margaret Cunningham, whispered to her sister that if
the handsome Highland chief had been _her_ partner, "she would not have
hazarded the loss of him by cutting anew."  Lachlan overheard the
compliment, as perhaps he was meant to do, and so far as he was
concerned hearts were trumps from that moment.  He wooed and won
Margaret Cunningham and married her forthwith.  The king was greatly
offended but what cared this happy man!  He carried his bride to Duart
and laughed at his foes.

The quiet life at home was not for him, however.  Soon he was playing
the game of the sword with the MacDonalds of Islay until a truce was
patched by means of a marriage between the clans.  There was peace for
a time, but the trouble blazed anew over the matter of some lifted
cattle, and they were at it again hammer-and-tongs.  The royal policy
seems to have been to permit these Highland gamecocks to fight each
other so long as they were fairly well matched.  In this case the
various MacDonalds combined in such numbers against Lachlan MacLean
that the king interfered and persuaded them to seek terms of
reconciliation.  Accordingly the Lord of the MacDonalds journeyed to
Duart Castle with his retinue of bare-legged gentlemen and was
hospitably received.  Lachlan was canny as well as braw, and he
clinched the terms of peace by first locking the visitors in a room
whose walls were some twenty feet thick, and then holding as hostages
the two young sons of Angus MacDonald.

The high-tempered MacDonald was naturally more exasperated than
pacified, and he turned the tables when Lachlan soon after went to
Islay to receive performance of the promises made touching certain
lands in dispute.  The Highland code of honor was peculiar in that
treachery appears to have been a weapon used without scruple.  The
MacDonalds swore that not a MacLean should suffer harm, but no sooner
had Lachlan and his clansmen and servants arrived than they were
attacked at night by a large force.  The party would have been put to
the sword, but that Lachlan rushed into the midst of the foe holding
aloft one of MacDonald's sons as a shield.

This caused postponement of the slaughter, MacDonald offering quarter
if his child should be delivered to him.  The MacLeans were disarmed
and bound, except two young men who had distinguished themselves by
laying many a MacDonald low in the heather.  These were beheaded at
once, and beginning next morning two MacLeans were led out and executed
each day in the presence of their own chief until no more than Lachlan
and his uncle were left.  They were spared only because the sanguinary
Angus MacDonald fell from his horse and was badly hurt before he could
finish his program.

======================================================================

[Illustration: Duart Castle, chief stronghold of the MacLeans.]

Ardnamurchan Castle, seat of the MacIans and the MacDonalds.

======================================================================

It would be tiresome to relate much more of this ensanguined,
interminable game of give and take which was the chief business of the
Highland clans in that century.  The clan of the MacIans whose seat was
at Ardnamurchan Castle on Mull later sided actively with the MacDonalds
and the feud became three-cornered.  Lachlan Mo'r MacLean was no petty
warrior, and his men were numbered by the thousand when he was in the
prime of his power.  Once he fell upon the island of Islay and put to
the sword as many as five hundred of his foes, "all the men capable of
bearing arms belonging to the Clan-donald," says an old account.  Angus
himself was chased into his castle and forced to give over half of
Islay to Lachlan to save his skin.

Now, indeed, was there a mustering of the MacDonalds from near and far
to invade Mull.  They gathered under the chiefs of Kintyre, Skye and
Islay, with the lesser clans under MacNeil of Gigha, the MacAllisters
of Loupe, and the MacPhees of Colonsay.  Bold Lachlan Mo'r MacLean was
outnumbered, but a singular stroke of luck enabled him to win a
decisive battle.  That MacDonald who was called the Red Knight of
Sleat, was much disturbed and shaken by a dream in which a voice
chanted a very doleful prophecy of which this is a sample:

  "Dire are the deeds the fates have doomed on thee!
  Defeated by the sons of Gillean the invading host shall be.
  On thee, Gearna-Dubh,[1] streams of blood shall flow;
  And the bold Red Knight shall die ere a sword is sheathed."


This message caused the Red Knight to sound the retreat soon after the
fray began, and his example spread panic among the force which broke
and ran for their boats, and the best MacDonald was he who first
reached the beach.  The claymores of the MacLeans hewed them down
without mercy and their heads were chopped off and thrown into a well
which has since borne a Gaelic name descriptive of the event.  It would
seem that these clans must have exterminated each other by this time,
but the bleak moors and rocky slopes of these western islands bore a
wonderful crop of fighting men, and soon the MacLeans were invading the
coast of Lorn and spreading havoc among the MacDonalds with great
slaughter.

Lachlan found time also to seek vengeance on the MacIans for daring to
meddle in his affairs.  John MacIan, chief of that smaller clan which
owed fealty to the MacDonalds, had been a suitor for the hand of
Lachlan Mo'r MacLean's mother, who was a sister of the Earl of Carlyle,
and had a fortune in her own right.  Now the MacIan renewed his
attentions, and Lachlan looked on grimly, aware that the motive was
greed of gold and lands.  His mother gave her consent but her
two-fisted son made no objection until the MacIan came to Mull to claim
his bride.  The marriage was performed in the presence of Lachlan and
his most distinguished retainers, and there was a feast and much
roaring conviviality.  In the evening, the company being hot with wine,
a rash MacIan brought up the matter of the recent feud and a pretty
quarrel was brewed in a twinkling.

Several of the MacIans boasted that their chief had wed "the old lady"
for the sake of her wealth.  "Drunkards ever tell the truth," flung
back a MacLean with which he plunged a dirk into the heart of the
tactless guest.  Instantly the swords were flashing, and hardly a
MacIan came alive out of the banqueting hall.  Lachlan missed this
melee, for some reason or other, but coming on the scene a little later
he quoted in the Gaelic a proverb which means, "If the fox rushes upon
the hounds he must expect to be torn."  His followers took it that he
felt no sorrow at the fate of the MacIans, and forthwith they rushed
into the chamber of the bridegroom, dragged him forth, and would have
dispatched him, but the lamentations of Lachlan's mother for once moved
her rugged son to pity, and he contented himself with throwing the
chief of the MacIans into the dungeon of Duart Castle.

This happened in the summer of 1588, and affairs were in this wise when
the galleon _Florencia_ came sailing into Tobermory Bay.  Her captain,
Don Pareira, was a fiery sea-fighter whom misfortune had not tamed.
These savage Highlanders were barbarians in his eyes, and he would
waste no courtesy on them.  There were several hundred Spanish soldiers
in the galleon, of the great army of troops which had been sent in the
Armada to invade England, and Captain Pareira thought himself in a
position to demand what he wanted.  He sent a boat ashore with a
message to Lachlan Mo'r MacLean at his castle at Duart, asking that
provisions be furnished him, and adding that in case of refusal or
delay he should take them by force.  To this Lachlan sent back the
haughty reply that "the wants of the distressed strangers should be
attended to after the captain of the Spanish ship had been taught a
lesson in courteous behavior.  In order that the lesson might be taught
him as speedily as possible, he was invited to land and supply his
wants by the forcible means of which he boasted.  It was not the custom
of the Chief of the MacLeans to pay attention to the demands of a
threatening and insolent beggar."

At this it may be presumed that Captain Pareira swore a few rounds of
crackling oaths in his beard as he strode his high-pooped quarter-deck.
His men who had gone ashore reported that the MacLean was an ill man to
trifle with and that he had best be let alone.  Already the clan was
gathering to repel a landing force from the galleon.  The captain of
the battered _Florencia_ took wiser counsel with himself and perceived
that he had threatened over hastily.  Pocketing his pride, he assured
the ruffled Lachlan of Castle Duart that he would pay with gold for
whatever supplies might be granted him.

Lachlan had other fish to fry, for the MacDonalds, exceedingly wroth at
the scurvy treatment dealt that luckless bridegroom and ally, the chief
of the MacIans, were up in arms and making ready to avenge the black
insult.  In need of men to defend himself, Lachlan MacLean struck a
bargain with the captain of the galleon.  If Pareira should lend him a
hundred soldiers from the _Florencia_ he would consider this service as
part payment for the supplies and assistance desired.

Away marched the contingent from the galleon in company with the
MacLean clansmen, and laid siege to the MacIan castle of Mingarry after
ravaging the small islands of Rum and Eigg.  Lachlan Mo'r was carrying
all before him, burning, killing, plundering both MacDonalds and
MacIans, when Captain Pareira sent him word that the _Florencia_ was
ready to sail, and he should like to have his soldiers returned.  To
this MacLean replied that the account between them had not been wholly
squared.  There was the matter of payment promised in addition to the
loan of the soldiers.  The people of Tobermory and thereabouts had sent
grain and cattle aboard the galleon, and they must have their money
before sailing day.

Captain Pareira promised that every satisfaction should be given before
he left the country, and again requested that his hundred _soldadoes_
be marched back to their ship.

This Lachlan was willing to do, but still suspecting the commander of
the galleon as a wily bird, he detained three of the officers of the
troops as hostages to assure final settlement.  Then he sent on board
the _Florencia_ young Donald Glas, son of the MacLean of Morvern, to
collect what was due and adjust the affair.  No sooner had he set foot
on deck, than he was disarmed and bundled below by order of Pareira who
considered that two could play at holding that form of collateral known
as hostages.

Now ensued a dead-lock.  Lachlan MacLean refused to yield up his brace
of Spanish officers unless the demands of his people were paid in full,
while Captain Pareira kept Donald Glas locked in a cabin and swore to
carry him to sea.  The tragedy which followed is told in the traditions
of Mull to this day.  When Donald Glas learned that he was kidnapped in
the galleon, he resolved to wreak dreadful revenge for the treachery
dealt his kinsmen.  On the morning when the _Florencia_ weighed anchor,
an attendant who had been confined with him was sent on shore and
Donald sent word of his fell intention to the chief of the clan.

Overnight Donald Glas had discovered that only a bulkhead separated his
cabin from the powder magazine of the galleon, and by some means, which
tradition omits to explain, he cut a hole through the planking and laid
a train ready for the match.  Just before the _Florencia_ weighed
anchor he was fetched on deck for a moment to take his last sight of
the heathery hills of Mull and Morvern.  Then the captive was thrust
back into his cabin, and with her great, gay banners trailing from
aloft, the galleon made sail and began slowly to move away from the
shore of Tobermory Bay.

It was then that Donald Glas, true MacLean was he, fired his train of
powder, and bang! the magazine exploded.  The galleon was torn asunder
with terrific violence, and the bodies of her soldiers and mariners
were flung far over the bay and even upon the shore.  So complete was
the destruction that only three of the several hundred Spaniards
escaped alive.  The _Florencia_ had vanished in a manner truly epic,
and proud were the MacLeans of the deed of young Donald Glas who gave
his life for the honor of his clan.

One of the surviving traditions is that a dog belonging to Captain
Pareira was hurled ashore alive.  The faithful creature, when it had
recovered from its hurts, refused to leave that part of the strand
nearest the wreck, and continued to howl most piteously by day and
night as long as it existed, which was more than a year.  The Spanish
officers, who had remained as hostages in the hands of Lachlan Mo'r
MacLean were set at liberty by that sometimes courteous chief, and were
permitted to proceed to Edinburgh where they lodged complaint with the
king touching the destruction of their galleon.  The matter of Captain
Pareira having been disposed of in this explosive fashion, Lachlan
MacLean returned to his main business of harrying the MacDonalds, and
so fiercely and destructively was the feud conducted thereafter, that
King James thought it time to interfere, lest he should have no
subjects left in the Western Highlands.  The warring chiefs were
summoned to Edinburgh and imprisoned and fined, after which they made
their peace with the king and returned to their island realms.  The
affair of the _Florencia_ was named in the charges brought against
MacLean.  In the official records of Holyrood Palace, seat of the
Scottish kings, is this information, laid before the Privy Council on
January 3rd, 1591:

That in the preceding October, Lachlan MacLean "accompanied with a
great number of thieves, broken men and ... of clans, besides the
number of one hundred Spaniards, came to the properties of His Majesty,
Canna, Rum, Eigg and the Isle of Elenole, and after they had wracked
and spoiled the said islands, they treasonably raised fire, and in
maist barbarous, shameful and cruel manner, burnt the same island, with
the men, women and children there, not sparing the youths and infants;
and at the same time past came to the Castle of Ardnamurchan, besieged
the same, and lay about the said castle three days, using in the
meantime all kinds of hostilities and force, both by fire and sword....
The like barbarous and shameful cruelty has seldom been heard of among
Christians in any kingdom or age."

On the 20th of March, 1588, King James "granted a remission to Lachlan
MacLean of Duart for the cruel murder of certain inhabitants of the
islands of Rum, Canna, and Eigg," but from the remission was excepted
the "plotting or felonious burning and flaming up, by sulphurous
powder, of a Spanish ship and of the men and provisions in her, near
the island of Mull."

Swift and tragic as was the fate of Captain Pareira and his ship's
company, it was perhaps more merciful than that which befell the great
squadron of galleons of the Armada that were cast on the coast of
Ireland, on the rocks of Clare and Kerry, in Galway Bay, and along the
shores of Sligo and Donegal.  More than thirty ships perished in this
way, and of the eight thousand half-drowned wretches who struggled
ashore no more than a handful escaped slaughter at the hands of the
wild Irish who knocked them on the head with battle-axes or stripped
them naked and left them to die of the cold.  Many were Spanish
gentlemen, richly clad, with gold chains and rings, and the common
sailors and soldiers had each a bag of ducats lashed to his wrist when
he landed through the surf.  They were slain for their treasure, and on
one sand strip of Sligo an English officer counted eleven hundred
bodies.

In a letter to Queen Elizabeth, Sir E. Bingham, Governor of Ulster,
wrote of the wreckage of twelve Armada ships which he knew of, "the men
of which ships did all perish in the sea save the number of eleven
hundred or upwards which we put to the sword; amongst whom there were
divers gentlemen of quality and service, as captains, masters of ships,
lieutenants, ensign bearers, other inferior officers and young
gentlemen to the number of some fifty.... which being spared from the
sword till orders must be had from the Lord Deputy how to proceed
against them, I had special directions sent me to see them executed as
the rest were, only reserving alive one Don Luis de Cordova, and a
young gentleman, his nephew, till your Highness's pleasure be known."

Alas, Elizabeth could not find it in her heart to spare even these two
luckless gentlemen of Spain, and one judges those rude Highlanders less
harshly for their bloodthirsty feuds at learning that the great Queen
herself "ordered their immediate execution when she received the
letter, and it was duly carried out."

Froude, in his essay "The Defeat of the Armada," comes to the defense
of Elizabeth, or at least he pleads extenuating circumstances.

======================================================================

[Illustration: Defeat of the Spanish Armada.  From the painting by P.
de Loutherbourg.]

======================================================================

"Most pitiful of all was the fate of those who fell into the hands of
the English garrisons of Galway and Mayo.  Galleons had found their way
into Galway Bay,--one of them had reached Galway itself,--the crews
half dead with famine and offering a cask of wine for a cask of water.
The Galway townsmen were humane, and tried to feed and care for them.
Most were too far gone to be revived, and died of exhaustion.  Some
might have recovered, but recovered they would be a danger to the
State.  The English in the West of Ireland were but a handful in the
midst of a sullen, half-conquered population.  The ashes of the Desmond
rebellion were still smoking, and Dr. Sanders and his Legatine
Commission were fresh in immediate memory.  The defeat of the Armada in
the Channel could only have been vaguely heard of.

"All that the English officers could have accurately known must have
been that an enormous expedition had been sent to England by Philip to
restore the Pope; and Spaniards, they found, were landing in thousands
in the midst of them with arms and money; distressed for the moment,
but sure, if allowed time to get their strength again, to set Connaught
in a blaze.  They had no fortresses to hold so many prisoners, no means
of feeding them, no more to spare to escort them to Dublin.  They were
responsible to the Queen's Government for the safety to the country.
The Spaniards had not come on any errand of mercy to her or hers.  The
stern order went out to kill them all wherever they might be found, and
two thousand or more were shot, hanged, or put to the sword.  Dreadful!
Yes, but war itself is dreadful, and has its own necessities."

A quaint recital of the fate of these fleeing galleons is to be found
in a history published by order of Oliver Cromwell, with the title of
"Old England Forever, or Spanish Cruelty Displayed."  One chapter runs
as follows:

"_Here followeth a particular Account of the Miserable Condition of the
Spanish Fleet, fled to the North of Scotland, and scattered, for many
Weeks, on the Sea-Coasts of Ireland.  Written October 19, 1588_.

"About the Beginning of August, the Fleet was, by Tempest, driven
beyond the Isles of Orkney, the Place being above 60 Leagues North
Latitude (as already mentioned) a very unaccustomed climate for the
Young Gallants of Spain, who did never before feel Storms on the Sea
nor cold weather in August.  And about those Northern Islands their
Mariners and Soldiers died daily by Multitudes, as by their Bodies cast
on land did appear.  And after twenty Days or more, having passed their
Time in great Miseries, they being desirous to return Home to Spain,
sailed very far Southward into the Ocean to recover Spain.

"But the Almighty, who always avenges the Cause of his afflicted People
who put their Confidence in Him, and brings down his Enemies who exalt
themselves to the Heavens, order'd the Winds to be violently
contrarious to this proud Navy, that it was with Force dissevered on
the High Seas to the West of Ireland; and so a great number of them
were driven into divers dangerous Bays, and upon Rocks, all along the
West and North Parts of Ireland, in sundry Places distant above an
hundred Miles asunder, and there cast away, some sunk, some broken,
some run on sands, and some were burned by the Spaniards themselves.

"As in the North Part of Ireland, towards Scotland, between the two
Rivers of Lough-foile and Lough-sivelly, nine were driven on Shore, and
many of them broke, and the Spaniards forced to come to Land for Succor
among the Wild Irish.

"In another Place, twenty miles South West from thence, in a Bay called
Borreys, twenty Miles Northward from Galloway, belonging to the Earl of
Ormond, one special great Ship of 1000 Tons, with 50 Brass Pieces, and
four Cannons was sunk, and all the People drowned, saving 16, who by
their Apparel, as it is advertized out of Ireland, seemed to be Persons
of Great Distinction.

"Then to come more to the Southward, thirty Miles upon the coast of
Thomond, North from the River of Shannon, two or three more perished,
whereof one was burned by the Spaniards themselves, and so driven to
the Shore.  Another was of San Sebastian, wherein were 300 men, who
were also all drowned, saving 60; a third Ship, with all her Lading was
cast away at a Place called Breckan.

"In another Place, opposite Sir Tirlogh O'Brien's House, there was
another great Ship lost, supposed to be a Galleass.  The Losses above
mentioned were betwixt the 5th, and 10th of September; as was
advertized from sundry Places out of Ireland.  So as by accompt. from
the 21st of July, when this Navy was first beaten by the Navy of
England, until the 10th of September, being the space of Seven Weeks,
and more, it is very probable that the said Navy had never had one good
Day or Night."


That much treasure of gold and jewels and plate went down in these lost
galleons was the opinion of Scotch and Irish tradition, but these
stories gained the greatest credence in the case of the _Florencia_ of
Tobermory Bay.  She was said to have contained the paymaster's chests
of the Armada, and to have carried to the bottom thirty million ducats
of money, and the church plate of fabulous richness.  It is certain
that the _Florencia_ was one of the largest galleons of the Armada and
that she never returned to Spain.  Her armament comprised fifty-two
guns, and her company numbered 400 soldiers and eighty-six sailors.  It
is probable that this was the _Florencia_ belonging to the Duke of
Tuscany, which was refitting at Santander in September, 1587,
concerning which Lord Ashley wrote to Walsingham, after the destruction
of the Armada, that she was commanded by a grandee of the first rank
who was always "served on silver."

While even now the most painstaking investigation is unable to find
definite information regarding the amount of treasure lost in the
galleon of Tobermory Bay, that she contained a vast amount of riches
was believed as early as a half century after her destruction.  The
papers of the great house of Argyll record the beginning of the search
almost as far away as 1640.  Of these fascinating documents, the first
is the grant to the Marquis of Argyll and his heirs by the Duke of
Lennox and Richmond, Lord High Admiral, with consent of King Charles
the First, of all rights and ownership in the wreck of the _Florencia_
and her treasure.  The deed of gift is dated from the Court of St.
Theobold's, February 5th, 1641 and "proceeds upon the narrative that in
the year 1588, when the great Spanish Armada was sent from Spain
towards England and Scotland, and was dispersed by the mercie of God,
there were divers ships and other vessels of the Armada, with
ornaments, munition, goods, and gear, which were thought to be of great
worth, cast away, and sunk to the sea ground on the coast of Mull, near
Tobermory, in the Scots seas, where they lay, and still lie as lost;
and that the Marquis of Argyll, near whose bounds the ships were lost,
having taken notice thereof, and made inquiries therefor, and having
heard some doukers[2] and other experts in such matters state that they
consider it possible to recover some of the ships and their valuables,
was moved to take and to cause pains to be taken thereupon at his own
charges and hazard.

"For this reason, the Great Admiral, with the King's consent, gives,
grants, and disposes to the Marquis the said ships, ornaments,
munition, etc.  of the Spanish Armada, and the entire profit that might
follow, or that he had already obtained therefrom, with full power to
the Marquis, his doukers, seamen, and others to search for the ships,
and intromit with them, providing the Marquis were accountable and made
prompt payment to the Duke of Lennox and Richmond of a hundredth part
of the ships, etc. with deduction of the expenses incurred for their
recovery, _pro rata_."

In these words the Crown assigned the treasure of the _Florencia_ to
the house of Argyll as part of its admiralty rights along that coast
where marched the family estates.  In 1665, the ninth Earl of Argyll,
son of him who had obtained ownership of the galleon, employed an
expert diver and wrecker by the name of James Mauld to search for the
treasure of ducats and plate.  It was an attractive speculation for
that notable "douker" who was promised four-fifths of all the "gold,
silver, metal, goods, etc." recovered and incidentally the Earl bound
himself "that the same James Mauld shall not be molested in his work,
and that his workmen shall have peaceable living in these parts during
their stay, and traveling through the Highlands and Isles, and shall be
free from all robberies, thefts, etc. so far as the said Earl can
prevent the same.  The said contract provides further lodging houses
for the workmen at the usual rates, and is fixed to endure for three
years after March 1, 1666."

These divers easily found the hull of the galleon, and they made a
chart showing its exact bearings by landmarks on two sides of the bay.
This ancient chart of the "Spanish wrack" as it is labeled, is owned by
the present Duke of Argyll, and has been used by the modern treasure
seekers who are unable even with its aid to find the remains of the
_Florencia_, so deeply have her timbers sunk in the tide-swept silt of
the bay.  The interest of the ninth Earl of Argyll in exploring the
galleon was diverted by Monmouth's Rebellion in which luckless
adventure he became an active leader.  He was made prisoner and
suffered the loss of his head which abruptly snuffled out his romantic
activities as a seeker after lost treasure.

He left among his papers a memorandum concerning the galleon, under
date of 1677, which states that "the Spanish wrackship was reputed to
have been the _Admiral of Florence_, one of the Armada of 1588, a ship
of fifty-six guns, with 30,000,000 of money on board.  It was burned
and so blown up that two men standing upon the cabin were cast safe on
shore.  It lay in a very good road, landlocked betwixt a little island
and a bay in the Isle of Mull, a place where vessels ordinarily
anchored free of any violent tide, with hardly any stream, a clean,
hard channel, with a little sand on the top, and little or no mud in
most places about, upon ten fathoms at high water and about eight at
ground ebb.

"The fore part of the ship above water was quite burned, so that from
the mizzen mast to the foreship, no deck was left.  The hull was full
of sand and the Earl caused it to be searched a little without finding
anything but a great deal of cannon ball about the main mast, and some
kettles, and tankers of copper, and such like in other places.  Over
the hindship, where the cabin was, there was a heap of great timber
which it would be difficult to remove, but under this is the _main
expectation_.

"The deck under the cabin was thought to be entire.  The cannon lay
generally at some yards distance from the ship, from two to twenty.
The Earl's father had the gift of the ship, and attempted the recovery
of it, but from want of skilled workmen he did not succeed.  In 1666,
the Laird of Melgum (James Mauld), who had learned the art of the
(diving) bell in Sweden and had made a considerable fortune by it,
entered into a contract with the Earl for three years by which Melgum
was to be at all the charge, and to give the Earl the fifth part of
what was brought up.  He wrought only three months, and most of the
time was spent in mending his bells and sending for material he needed,
so that he raised only two brass cannon of a large calibre, but very
badly fortified, and a great iron gun.

"After this, being invited to England, he wrought no more, thinking his
trade a secret, and that the Spanish ship would wait for him.  On the
expiring of the contract, the Earl undertook the work alone and without
the aid of any one who had ever seen diving, recovered six cannon, one
of which weighed near six hundred weight.  The Earl afterwards entered
into a contract with a German who undertook great things, and talked of
bringing a vessel of forty guns, but instead brought only a yacht and
recovered only one anchor, going away soon after, taking his gold with
him and leaving some debt behind.

"The contract with the German has expired, and the Earl is provided
with a vessel, bells, ropes, and tongs, and with men to work by
direction, yet, although he is confident in his own understanding of
the art of diving with the bell, he is willing to enter into a
contract.  He will dispone (grant) the vessel for three years, provided
the contractor should keep four skilled men to work in seasonable
weather from May 1 to October 1.  The Earl will furnish a ship of 60 or
70 tons with twelve seamen, and give his partner a fifth part of the
proceeds.  If a Crown were found it was to be exempted from the
division and presented to his Majesty....

"It is concluded that if the money expected be fallen upon, the fifth
part will quickly pay all expenses, and reward the ingenious artist,
and if that fail, the cannon will certainly repay the charges."

There are also preserved articles of agreement, dated December 18th,
1676, by which the Earl makes over a three-year concession to John
Saint Clare, minister at Ormistoun in Scotland, "for himself and as
taking burden for his father," to search the wreck on shares, the Earl
reserving "one-third part of what should be recovered during the first
year, and one-half of what should be recovered during the last two
years."  It is also provided that "if the Saint Clares were disturbed
during the first year, so as not to be able to work or raise the wreck
without damage to their persons (by reason of the unsettled state of
the country), the contract should be regarded as not taking effect for
a year.  The Earl binds himself to produce before November 1, 1676, his
right to the ship, under the Great Seal of Scotland, at Edinburgh, and
to deliver a copy of it to the Saint Clares.  John Saint Clare,
younger, binds himself to repair with all skill for its recovery, and
for the recovery of the valuables, during the space of three years, and
to make true account and payment of the shares above reserved to the
Earl and his heirs, etc.  Lastly, both parties oblige themselves
faithfully to observe all the articles of agreement under the
liquidated penalty of 2,000 marks, Scots."

The Saint Clares, or Sinclairs, as the name is spelled in other
documents of the same tenor, assigned their rights and contract to one
Hans Albricht von Treibelen, who was probably that German referred to
by the Earl as taking his gold with him and leaving his debts behind.
This document contains a fascinating mention of "all that might be
found in the water and about the ship, as gold, silver, bullion,
jewels, etc." and sets forth a new scheme of division of the spoils.
Now there appears Captain Adolpho E. Smith as a partner of Hans
Albricht von Treibelen, and one finds another parchment executed by the
Earl who appears to have thought that these "doukers" would bear
watching, for they are enjoined "immediately on the recovery of the
wreck to deliver on the spot to the Earl's factors or servants who are
daily to attend the work and to be witnesses of what is recovered....
Should the work be impeded by the violence of the country people, it is
provided that the term of the contract might be lengthened."

The repeated references to molestation by the inhabitants round about
were aimed at the Clan MacLean.  The great Lachlan M'or had long since
closed his stormy career, and, wrapped in his plaid, his bones were
smouldering in a grave by Duart Castle.  His kinsmen had good memories,
however, and there was that debt for provisions which had been left
owing by Captain Pareira of the _Florencia_ some eighty years before.
It might seem that young Donald Glas had squared the account when he
blew the galleon and her crew to kingdom come, but the MacLeans were
men to nurse the embers of a feud and set the sparks to flying at the
next opportunity.  They held it that theirs was the first right to the
wreck, and cared not a rap for any documentary rights that might have
been granted to the Campbells (the clan of the Earls of Argyll), by the
Great Admiral of Scotland.

Hector MacLean, brother of Lachlan MacLean of Castle Torloisk, near
Tobermory, rallied a force and drove the divers from the wreck.  Then,
in order that there might be no doubt about the views of the MacLeans,
they built a small fort overlooking the bay and the scene of the wreck,
the ruins of which still survive.  There a detachment was posted with
orders to make it hot for any interlopers who might try to find the
sunken treasure without first consulting the MacLeans.

This interference found its way into the Courts at Edinburgh in the
form of a petition of grievances suffered by Captain Adolpho E. Smith.
He swore before a notary that John MacLean, of Kinlochalan, and John
MacLean, a servitor to Lachlan MacLean of Torloisk, "had convocated six
or seven score of armed men, and he had exhibited to them a royal
warrant bearing his Majesty's protection and free liberty to Captain
Smith and his servants to work at the wreck-ship at Tobermory, and
prohibiting any of his Majesty's subjects from interrupting them.
Captain Smith then required the MacLeans to dissipate the armed men,
part of whom were in a fort or trench at Tobermory, newly built by them
for interrupting the work, and the rest in the place or houses
adjacent,--as John MacLean of Kinlochalan acknowledged,--and in his
Majesty's name required them to give him and his men liberty to
prosecute their work at the wreck.

"Upon this Kinlochalan answered that the men in arms were not commanded
by him but by Hector MacLean, brother of Lachlan MacLean of Torloisk,
and others; and he declared that not only would Captain Smith and his
men be hindered, but that the men in arms would shoot guns, muskets and
pistols at them, should any of them offer to duck or work at the wreck.
Whereupon Captain Smith took this instrument, protesting against the
aforesaid MacLeans and their accomplices, at Tobermory in Mull, 7
September, 1678."  The militant and tenacious MacLeans struck terror to
the heart of Captain Adolpho Smith, according to another official
document called a "notorial instrument at the instance of William
Campbell, skipper to the Earl of Argyll's frigate, called _Anna of
Argyll_.  This worthy sea dog, it appears, as procurator for the Earl,"
had compeared, desired, and required Captain Adolpho E. Smith and his
men to duck and work at the wreckship and to conform to the minutes of
contract betwixt the Earl and him, otherwise to give the bells, sinks,
and other instruments necessary for ducking to William Campbell, and
the men on board the Earl's frigate, who would duck them without any
regard to the threatenings of the MacLeans.

"Notwithstanding this, Captain Smith and his men refused to duck and
work, or to give over the bells, etc., necessary for the work to
William Campbell who thereupon, as procurator for the Earl of Argyll
asked and took instruments and protested against Captain Smith for
cost, skaith, and damage conform to the contract.  The instrument was
taken by Donald McKellar, notary public, at and aboard the yacht
belonging to Captain Adolpho E. Smith, lying in the Bay of Tobermory in
Mull, 7 September, 1678."

The wreck of the galleon was fought over about this time, not only by
the mettlesome MacLeans but also by the Duke of York as Lord High
Admiral of Scotland and the Isles, succeeding in that office the Duke
of Lennox.  He challenged the rights of the house of Argyll to the
_Florencia_ and her treasure and instituted legal proceedings in due
form which were decided in favor of the defendant, thereby confirming
for all time the possession of the wreck, which belongs to the present
Duke of Argyll.  The verdict read in part as follows:

"The rights, reasons, and allegations of the parties, and the gifts and
ratifications therein referred to, produced by Archibald, Earl of
Argyll, being at length heard and seen, the Lords of Council and
Session assoilized the said Archibald Earl of Argyll from the hail
points and articles of the summons libelled or precept intended and
pursued against him at the instance of said William Aikman,
Procurator-Fiscal of the Admiralty, before said Lord High Admiral and
his deputies, and decreed and declared him quit and free thereof in all
time coming.  Dated 27th, July, 1677."

There comes into the story, during the lifetime of the ninth Earl, the
figure of Sir William Sacheverall, Governor of the Isle of Man, who was
interested as a partner in one of the several concessions granted.  He
had left an account of his voyage to Mull in the year 1672, printed
shortly after the event, in which he not only records sundry efforts to
fish up the treasure but gives also a lively and vivid picture of the
primitive Highlander on his native heather.

"About twelve o'clock," he wrote, "we made the Sound of Mull.  We
saluted the Castle of Duart with five guns, and they returned three.  I
sent in my pinnace for the boats, and things you had left there; and in
the evening we cast anchor in the Bay of Tauber Murry, which for its
bigness, is one of the finest and fastest in the world.  The mouth of
it is almost shut up with a little woody island call'd the Calve, the
opening to the South not passable for small boats at low-water, and
that to the North barely Musquet-shot over.  To the Landward, it is
surrounded with high Mountains cover'd with woods, pleasantly
intermixed with rocks, and three or four Cascades of water which throw
themselves from the top of the Mountain with a pleasure that is
astonishing, all of which together make one of the oddest and most
charming Prospects I ever saw.

"Italy itself, with all the assistance of Art, can hardly afford
anything more beautiful and diverting; especially when the weather was
clear and serene, to see the Divers sinking three-score foot under
water and stay sometimes above an hour, and at last returning with the
spoils of the Ocean; whether it were Plate, or Money, it convinced us
of the Riches and Splendor of the once thought _Invincible Armada_.
This rais'd a variety of Ideas, in a Soul as fond of Novelty as mine.
Sometimes I reflected with horror on the danger of the British Nation,
sometimes with Pleasure on that generous Courage and Conduct that sav'd
a sinking State; and sometimes of so great an Enterprize baffled and
lost, by accidents unthought of and unforseen....

"The first week the weather was pleasant, but spent in fitting our
Engines, which proved very well, and every way suited to the design;
and our Divers outdid all examples of this nature.  But with the
Dog-Days the autumnal rains usually begin in these parts, and for six
weeks we had scarce a good day.  The whole frame of Nature seem'd
inhospitable, bleak, stormy, rainy, windy, so that our Divers could not
bear the cold, and despairing to see any amendment of weather I
resolved on a journey across the Isle of Mull, to the so much
celebrated II-Columb-Kill,[3] in English St. Columb's Church....

"The first four miles we saw but few houses, but cross'd a wild desert
country, with a pleasant mixture of Woods and Mountains.  Every man and
thing I met seem'd a Novelty.  I thought myself entering upon a new
Scene of Nature, but Nature rough and unpolished, in her undress.  I
observed the men to be large bodied, stout, subtile, active, patient of
cold and hunger.  There appeared in all their actions a certain
generous air of freedom, and contempt of those trifles, Luxury and
Ambition, which we so servilely creep after.  They bound their
appetites by their necessities and their happiness consists not in
having much, but in coveting little.

"The Women seem to have the same sentiments as the men; tho' their
Habits were mean, and they had not our sort of breeding, yet in many of
them there was a natural Beauty, and a graceful Modesty which never
fails of attracting.  The usual outward habit of both sexes is the
Plaid; the women's much finer, the colours more lively, and the squares
larger than the men's, and put me in mind of the ancient Picts.  This
serves them for a Veil and covers both head and body.  The men wear
theirs after another manner; when designed for ornament it is loose and
flowing, like the mantles our painters give their Heroes.

"Their thighs are bare, with brawny Muscles; a thin brogue on the foot,
a short buskin of various colours on the leg, tied above the calf with
a strip'd pair of garters.  On each side of a large Shot-pouch hangs a
Pistol and a Dagger; a round Target on their backs, a blue Bonnet on
their heads, in one hand a broadsword, and a musquet in the other.
Perhaps no nation goes better arm'd, and I assure you they will handle
them with bravery and dexterity, especially the Sword and Target, as
our veteran Regiments found to their cost at Killie Crankie."

Although Sir William Sacheverall, he of the facile pen and the romantic
temper, brought no Spanish treasure to light, he helped us to see those
fighting MacLeans and MacDonalds as they were in their glory, and his
description was written almost two and a half centuries ago.

The "Spanish wrack" was handed down from one chief of the Campbell clan
to another, as part of the estate, until in 1740, John, the second Duke
of Argyll, decided to try his luck, and employed a diving bell, by
which means a magnificent bronze cannon was recovered.  It has since
been kept at Inverary Castle, the seat of the Dukes of Argyll, as an
heirloom greatly esteemed.  This elaborately wrought piece of ordnance,
almost eleven feet in length, bears the arms of Francis I of France
(for whom it was cast at Fontainebleau) and the fleur-de-lis.  It was
probably captured from Francis at the battle of Pavia during his
invasion of Italy, and the Spanish records state that several of such
cannon were put on a vessel contributed to the Armada by the state of
Tuscany.  At the same time a large number of gold and silver coins were
found by the divers, and the treasure seeking was thereby freshly
encouraged.  Modern experts in wrecking and salvage have agreed that
the crude apparatus of those earlier centuries was inadequate to combat
the difficulties of exploring a wreck of the type of the _Florencia_
galleon, built as she was of great timbers of the iron-like African oak
which to-day is found to be staunch and unrotted after a submersion of
more than three hundred years.

The diving bells of those times were dangerous and clumsy, and easily
capsized.  The men worked from inside them by thrusting out hooks and
tong-like appliances, and dared venture no deeper than eight fathoms,
or less than fifty feet.  In other words, the treasure might be in the
galleon, but it was impossible to find and bring it up.  For another
century and more, the _Florencia_ was left undisturbed until about
forty years ago, the present Duke of Argyll, then Marquis of Lorne,
considered it his family duty to investigate the bottom of Tobermory
Bay, his curiosity being pricked at finding the ancient chart, and
other documents already quoted, among the archives stored in Inverary
Castle.  More for sport than for profit, he sent down a diver who found
a few coins, pieces of oak, and a brass stanchion, after which the
owner bothered his head no more about these phantom riches for some
time.

In 1903, or three hundred and fifteen years after the _Florencia_ found
her grave in Tobermory Bay, a number of gentlemen of Glasgow, rashly
speculative for Scots, formed a company and subscribed a good many
thousand dollars to equip and maintain a treasure-seeking expedition by
modern methods.  The Duke of Argyll, like his ancestors before him, was
ready to grant permission to search the wreck of the galleon for a term
of years, conditioned upon a fair division of the spoils.  He let them
have the chart, without which no treasure hunt deserves the name, and
all the family papers dealing with the _Florencia_.  In charge of the
operations was placed Captain William Burns of Glasgow, a hard-headed
and vastly experienced wrecker who had handled many important salvage
enterprises for the marine underwriters in seas near and far.

The contrast between this twentieth century syndicate with its steam
dredges and electric lights, and that primitive age when the MacLeans
were harassing Captain Adolpho Smith from their fort beside the bay, is
fairly astonishing.  The gentlemen of Glasgow were not moved by
sentiment, however, and soon Captain Burns was spending their money in
a preliminary survey of the waters and the sands where the galleon was
supposed to be.  Although the ancient chart was explicit in its
bearings, and these were made when men were living who had seen a part
of the wreck above tide, locating the _Florencia_ proved to be a
baffling puzzle.  During the first season, 1903, divers and lighters
were employed in this work of searching, but the salvage consisted of
no more than another bronze cannon loaded with a stone ball, several
swords, scabbards, and blunderbusses, a gold ring, and some fifty
doubloons bearing the names of Ferdinand and Isabella, and Don Carlos.

Two years later, in 1905, the work was fairly begun with a costly
equipment.  The bottom of the bay was photographed and a mound of sand
revealed, which, it was concluded, covered the surviving part of the
galleon.  Digging into this bank, the divers found many curious
trophies, among them more arms and munition, bottles or canteens,
boarding pikes, copper powder pans, and other small furniture, much
corroded and encrusted.  It was surmised that the vessel lay with her
stern cocked up, and that in this end, indicated by the swelling of the
sand bank, the treasure was hidden.

Powerful suction pumps worked by steam were set going to clear away
this bank, and they bored into it steadily for three weeks while the
divers dug shafts to clear away obstructions.  At length, a massive
silver candlestick was fetched up, and the sand pumps clanked more
industriously than ever.  At the end of the summer, about one hundred
square feet of the bank had been removed, but the whereabouts of the
galleon was by no means certain.

As soon as the weather became favorable in the following spring,
Captain Burns and his crew returned to the quest with more men and
machinery than before.  It was really impossible that such a business
as this could be carried on without some touch of the fantastic and the
picturesque.  There now intrudes a Mr. Cossar, employed as "the famous
expert, who, by means of delicate apparatus can indicate where metal or
wood is buried in any quantity underground," and he spent the summer
taking observations and buoying the bay with floats or markers.  At
these places boring was carried on means of steel rods to a depth of
one hundred and forty feet, while the dredges were busy exploring the
vicinity of the sand bank.

The area thoroughly explored was increased to eight acres in 1906, in
water from seven to fourteen fathoms deep.  That famous expert, Mr.
Cossar, and his delicate apparatus were reinforced by Mr. John Stears
of Yorkshire, one of the most notable diviners of England.  He operated
with no more apparatus than a hawthorn twig and professed to be able to
locate precious metals no matter how many fathoms deep, and more than
this, _mirabile dictu_, to tell you whether it was gold, or silver, or
copper that made his inspired twig twist and bend in his fingers.  Mr.
Stears was taken as seriously as Mr. Cossar had been, and the findings
of one confirmed the verdicts of the other.  The powerful salvage
steamer _Breamer_ with a large crew searched where the diviner told
them to go, and several pieces of silver plate were recovered amid the
excitement of all hands.

The _Breamer_ continued work in 1907, but during the next year the
waters of Tobermory Bay were unvexed by the treasure-seekers.  Then the
syndicate went into its pockets for more cash, got its second wind, so
to speak, and wrapped its operations in a cloud of secrecy, quite the
proper dodge for a venture of this kind.  A new and taciturn crew was
hired for the _Breamer_, and whatever was found under water was hidden
from prying eyes.  The additional funds raised amounted to $15,000, and
Captain Burns was told to obtain the best equipment possible.  It was
reported in the autumn of that year that "Mr. Cossar, the mineral
expert, by whose skill the scope of the operations was more or less
controlled, had broken down in health owing to the severe strain, and
had gone home to recruit," but John Stears of Yorkshire with his
hawthorn twig was still finding treasure which refused to be found by
divers.

======================================================================

[Illustration: Diving to find the treasure galleon in Tobermory Bay.
(Photographed in 1909.)]

The salvage steamer _Breamer_ equipped with suction dredge, removing a
sandbank from the supposed location of the Florencia galleon in 1909.

======================================================================

The five-year concession from the Duke of Argyll had expired and was
renewed by a syndicate organized in London, the manager a Col. K. M.
Foss, an American, who appeared in Tobermory and conveyed an impression
of cock-sure Yankee hustle.  He announced that his agents were making
historical researches in the libraries and museums of Europe and had
already convinced him that the lost galleon was crammed with treasure;
that the chart relied on in past searches was all wrong, and expressed
his surprise that the extensive salvage operations of recent years
should have failed to locate the exact position of the wreck.  In a
word, Scotchmen might know a thing or two, but your up-to-date Yankee
was the man to crack the nut of the lost _Florencia_ and deftly extract
the kernel.  The appearance of this Colonel Foss in this storied
landscape of Tobermory Bay has a certain humorous aspect.  He hardly
seems to belong in the _ensemble_ of the search for the treasure
galleon which has been carried on for centuries.

This entertaining American may perhaps have unearthed information
hitherto unknown, but the fact is worth some stress that all previous
investigations had failed to prove beyond doubt that the _Florencia_
bore from Spain the thirty millions of money reputed to have been
stowed in her lazarette.  An ancient document known as "The Confession
of Gregorie de Sotomeya of Melgaco in Portugal" contains a list of the
treasure ships of the Armada.  He was with the fleet in the galleon
_Neustra Senora del Rosario_, commanded by Dom Pedro de Valdes, and he
goes on to say:

"To the sixth question concerning what treasure there was in the fleet,
I say there was great stories of money and plate which came in the
galleon wherein the Duke of Medina was (_The San Martin_), and in the
ship of Dom Pedro de Valdez which was taken, and in the Admiral of the
galleons (_The San Lorenzo_), and in the Galley Royal (_The Capitana
Royale_), and in the Vice Admiral wherein was Juan Martinez de Ricalde
(_The Santa Anna_), and in the Vice Admiral whereof was General Diego
(_The San Christobel_), and in the Vice Admiral of the pinnaces (_N. S.
de Pilar de Targoza_), and in the Vice-Admiral of the hulks (_The Gran
Grifon_), and in a Venitian ship in which came General Don Alonzo de
Leyna.  The report goeth that this ship brought great stores of
treasure, for that there came in her the Prince of Ascoli, and many
other noblemen.  This is all I know touching the treasure."

The name of the _Florencia_ does not appear herein, yet the report of
her vast riches was current in the Western Highlands no more than one
lifetime after the year of the Armada.  That men of solid business
station and considerable capital can be found to-day to charter
wrecking steamers, divers, dredges, and what not to continue this
enterprise proves that romance is not wholly dead.

In the town of Tobermory, the busy, mysterious parties of treasure
seekers, as they come year after year with their impressive flotilla of
apparatus, furnish endless diversion and conjecture.  The people will
tell you, in the broad English of the Highlander, and in the Gaelic,
even more musical, as it survives among the Western Islands, the legend
of the beautiful Spanish princess who came in the _Florencia_, and was
wooed and won by a bold MacLean, and they will show you the old mill
whose timbers, still staunchly standing, were taken from the wreck of
the galleon.  In Mull, and oftener among the islands further seaward
and toward the Irish coast, are to be found black-eyed and black-haired
men and women, not of the pure Celtic race, in whose blood is the
distant strain bequeathed by those ancestors who married shipwrecked
Spanish sailors of the Armada, and perhaps among them are descendants
of these two or three seamen who were hurled ashore alive when the
_Florencia_ was destroyed by the hand of young Donald Glas MacLean.

In quaint Tobermory whose main street nestles along the edge of the
bay, the ancient foemen, MacLeans and MacDonalds, tend their shops side
by side, and it seems as if almost every other signboard bore one of
these clan names.  If you would hear the best talk of the galleon and
her treasure, it is wise to seek the tiny grocery and ship chandlery of
Captain Coll MacDonald, a gentle white-bearded man, so slight of
stature and mild of mien and speech that you are surprised to learn
that for many years he was master of a great white-winged clipper ship
of the famous City Line of Glasgow, in the days when this distinction
meant something.  Now he has come back to spend his latter days in this
tranquil harbor and to spin yarns of many seas.

======================================================================

[Illustration: Scabbards, flasks, cannon balls, and small objects
recovered from the sunken Armada galleon.]

Stone cannon balls and breech-block of a breech loading gun fished up
from the wreck of the Florencia galleon.

======================================================================

"The scour of the tide has settled the wreck of the galleon many feet
in the sand," he told me.  "I can show you on a chart what the old
bearings were, as they were handed down from one generation to the
next, but Captain Burns is not sure that he has yet found her.  The
money is there, I have no doubt.  There was a bark in the bay not long
ago, and when she pulled up anchor a Spanish doubloon was sticking to
one fluke.  Mr. Stears, the Yorkshireman with the divining rod, did
some wonderful things, but the treasure was not found.  To test him,
bags of silver and gold and copper money were buoyed under water in the
bay, with no marks to show.  It was done by night and he was kept away.
He went out in a boat next morning and was rowed around a bit, and
wherever the metal was hid under water, his twig told him, without a
mistake.  More than that, he knew what kind of metal it was under the
water."

"And how was that!" I asked of Captain Coll MacDonald.

"He would hold a piece of gold money in each hand when the twig began
to twist and dip.  If the gold was under the water, the twig would pull
with a very strong pull, so that he knew.  If it was undecided like, he
would hold silver money, and the twig told him the proper message.  I
watched him working many a time, and it was very wonderful."

"But he did not find the treasure," I ventured to observe.

"Ah, lad, it was no fault of his," returned the old gentleman.  "The
Spanish gold is scattered far and wide over the bottom of the bay, I
have no doubt.  Donald Glas MacLean did a very thorough job when he
blew the galleon to hell."

The present Duke of Argyll, brother-in-law of the late King Edward,
bears among the many and noble and resonant titles that are his by
inheritance, several which recall the earlier pages of the history of
the Clan Campbell, the brave days of the feudal Highlands, and the
ancient rights in the Armada Galleon of Tobermory Bay.  He is Baron
Inverary, Mull, Morvern, and Tiry; twenty-ninth Baron of Lochow, with
the Celtic title of the Cailean Mo'r, chief of the Clan Campbell, from
Sir Colin Campbell, knighted in 1286; Admiral of the Western Coast and
Islands, Marquis of Lorne and Kintye; Keeper of the Great Seal of
Scotland and of the Castles of Dunstaffnage, Dunoon and Carvick,
Hereditary High Sheriff of the County of Argyll.

He once explained how the ownership of the _Florencia_ galleon came to
his family by means of the ancient grant already quoted.  The Campbells
held the admiralty rights of the coast of Mull at the time of the
Armada, and any wreck was lawfully theirs for this reason.  The
document was simply a formal confirmation of these rights.  The
_Florencia_ was flotsam and jetsam to be taken by whatever chiefs held
the rights of admiralty.  A case involving the salmon fishing rights of
a Scottish river was recently decided by virtue of a charter of
admiralty rights granted by Robert the Bruce, who ruled and fought six
hundred years ago.

In order to complete the documentary links of this true story of the
Armada galleon, it may be of interest to quote from a letter recently
received by the author from the present Duke of Argyll, in which he
says:


The galleon was the ship furnished by Tuscany as her contribution to
the Armada.  She was called the _Florencia_, or _City of Florence_, and
was commanded by Captain Pereira, a Portugese, and had a crew largely
Portugese on board.  We have found specimens of his plate with the
Pereira arms engraved on the plate border.  She carried breech loading
guns on her upper deck, and you will see one of them at the Blue Coat
School now removed from London to the suburbs.

On the lower deck were some guns got from Francis I at the Battle of
Pavia.  I have a very fine one at Inverary Castle, got from the wreck
in 1740.  Diving with a diving bell was commenced in 1670 and
discontinued on account of civil troubles.  Pereira foolishly took part
in local clan disputes, helping the MacLeans of Mull against the
MacDonalds.  One of the MacDonalds, when a prisoner on board, is said
to have blown up the vessel as she was warping out of harbor.

I found an old plan and located the "Spanish wrack" from the plan, but
only sent a man down once from a yacht.

There was little obtained during the last divings, cannon balls,
timber, a few pieces of plate, small articles--about 70 dollars, etc.

Yours faithfully,
  ARGYLL.

Kensington Palace,
  April 25,--1910."




[1] A cliff which was the key to the position held by the MacLeans.

[2] Divers.

[3] Iona.




CHAPTER VIII

THE LOST PLATE FLEET OF VIGO

No treasure yarn is the real thing unless it glitters with ducats,
ingots, and pieces of eight, which means that in the brave days when
riches were quickest won with cutlass, boarding pike, and carronade, it
was Spain that furnished the best hunting afloat.  For three centuries
her galleons and treasure fleets were harried and despoiled of wealth
that staggers the imagination, and their wreckage littered every ocean.
English sea rovers captured many millions of gold and silver, and
pirates took their fat shares in the West Indies, along the coasts of
America from the Spanish Main to Lima and Panama, and across the
Pacific to Manila.  And to-day, the quests of the treasure seekers are
mostly inspired by hopes of finding some of the vanished wealth of
Spain that was hidden or sunk in the age of the Conquistadores and the
Viceroys.

Of all the argosies of Spain, the richest were those plate fleets which
each year carried to Cadiz and Seville the cargoes of bullion from the
mines of Peru, and Mexico, and the greatest treasure ever lost since
the world began was that which filled the holds of the fleet of
galleons that sailed from Cartagena, Porto Bello, and Vera Cruz in the
year 1702.  What distinguishes this treasure story from all others is
that it is not befogged in legend and confused by mystery and
uncertainty.  And while ships' companies are roaming the Seven Seas to
find what small pickings the pirates and buccaneers may have lifted in
their time, the most marvelous Spanish treasure of them all is no
farther away than a harbor on the other side of the Atlantic.

At the bottom of Vigo Bay, on the coast of Spain, lies that fleet of
galleons and one hundred millions of dollars in gold ingots and silver
bars.  This estimate is smaller than the documentary evidence vouches
for.  In fact, twenty-eight million pounds sterling is the accepted
amount, but one hundred million dollars has a sufficiently large and
impressive sound, and it is wise to be conservative to the verge of
caution in dealing with lost treasure which has been made so much more
the theme of fiction than a question of veracity.  After escaping the
perils of buccaneer and privateer and frigate, this treasure fleet went
down in a home port, amid smoke and flame and the thunder of guns
manned by English and Dutch tars under that doughty admiral of Queen
Anne, Sir George Rooke.  It was the deadliest blow ever dealt the
mighty commerce of Spain during those centuries when her ruthless grasp
was squeezing the New World of its riches.

There, indeed, is the prize for the treasure seeker of to-day who
dreams of doubloons and pieces of eight.  Nor could pirate hoard have a
more blood-stained, adventurous history than these millions upon
millions, lapped by the tides of Vigo Bay, which were won by the sword
and lost in battle.  During these last two hundred years many efforts
have been made to recover the freightage of this fleet, but the bulk of
the treasure is still untouched, and it awaits the man with the cash
and the ingenuity to evolve the right salvage equipment.  At work now
in Vigo Bay is the latest of these explorers, an Italian, Pino by name,
inventor of a submarine boat, a system of raising wreck, and a
wonderful machine called a hydroscope for seeing and working at the
bottom of the sea.

With Pino it is a business affair operated by means of a concession
from the Spanish government, but he is something more than an inventor.
He is a poet, he has the artistic temperament, and when he talks of his
plans it is in words like these:

"I have found means to disclose to human eyes the things hidden in the
being of the furious waves of the infinite ocean, and how to recover
them.  Mine is the simple key with which to open to man the mysterious
virgin temples of the nymphs and sirens who, by their sweet singing,
draw men to see and to take their endless treasures."

This interesting Pino is no dreamer, however, and he has enlisted ample
capital with which to build costly machinery and charter yachts and
steamers.  With him is associated Carlo L. Iberti, and there is an
ideal pattern of a treasure seeker for you, a man of immense
enthusiasm, of indefatigable industry, dreaming, thinking, living in
the story of the galleons of Vigo Bay.  It was he who secured the
concession from Madrid, it was he who as he says, "was flying from
province to province, from country to country, from archives to
archives, from library to library, ever studying, copying, and
acquiring all documents relating to Vigo.  I had made up my mind to
find out all that was to be known about the treasure.  And I believe I
have succeeded."

Never was there such a prospectus as Iberti wrote to awaken the
interest of investors in the undertaking of Pino.  It was a historical
work bristling with data, authorities, references, from French,
Spanish, and English sources.  It was convincing, final, positively
superb.  One blinked at reading it, as if dazzled by the sight of
mountains of gold, and moreover every word of it was true.  As a text
for this narrative, his summary, the peroration, so to speak, fairly
hits one between the eyes:

"As the total quantity of treasure which arrived at Vigo in 1702
amounted to 126,470,600 pesos, or L27,493,609, there is not the least
doubt that the treasure in gold and silver still lying in the galleons
of Vigo Bay amounts to as much as 113,396,085 pieces of eight, or
L24,651,323, after deducting the treasure unloaded before the battle,
the booty taken by the victors, and that recovered by explorers.  That
would have been the value of the treasure two hundred years ago.
To-day, its value would be greater, at a moderate estimate of
L28,000,000.  Such is the sum which we who are interested in the
recovery of the treasure have set our hearts on winning from the sea."

======================================================================

[Illustration: Sir George Rooke, commanding the British fleet at the
battle of Vigo Bay.]

======================================================================

After this, the hoards of the most notorious and hard-working pirates
seem picayune, trifling, shabby, the small change of the age of buried
treasure.  Why Signor Iberti is so cock-sure of his figures, and how
that wondrous treasure fleet was lost in Vigo Bay is a story worth
telling if there be any merit in high adventures, hard fighting, and
the tang of salty seas in the days when the world was young.  No more
than nine years after the first voyage of Columbus, galleons laden with
treasure were winging it from the West Indies to Spain, and this golden
stream was flowing year by year until the time of the American
Revolution.  The total was to be counted not in millions but in
billions, and this prodigious looting of the New World gave to Spain
such wealth and power that her centuries of greatness were literally
builded upon foundations of ingots and silver bars.

Before Sir Francis Drake sailed into the Caribbean, the Dutch and
English had been playing at the great game of galleon hunting, but
their exploits had been no more than vexations, and the security of the
plate fleets was not seriously menaced until "El Draque" spread terror
and destruction down one coast of the Americas and up the other, from
Nombre de Dios to Panama.  Heaven alone knows how many great galleons
he shattered and plundered, but from the _San Felipe_ and the
_Cacafuego_ he took two million dollars in treasure, and he numbered
his other prizes by the score.  Martin Frobisher carried the huge East
India galleon _Madre de Dios_ by boarding in the face of tremendous
odds, the blood running from her scuppers, and was rewarded with
$1,250,000 worth of precious stones, ebony, ivory, and Turkish carpets.

During the period of the English Commonwealth, Admiral Stayner pounded
to pieces a West Indian treasure fleet of eight sail, and from one of
them took two millions in silver, while Blake fought his way into the
harbor of Teneriffe and destroyed another splendid argosy under the
guns of the forts.  It is recorded that thirty-eight wagons were
required to carry the gold and jewels thus obtained from Portsmouth to
London.  The records of the British Admiralty have preserved a
memorandum of the prize money distributed to the officers and men of
the _Active_ and _Favorite_ from the treasures taken in the _Hermione_
galleon off Cadiz in 1762, and it is a document to make a modern
mariner sigh for the days of his forefathers.  Here is treasure finding
as it used to flourish:

  The Admiral and the Commander of the Fleet.... $324,815
  The Captain of the _Active_...................  332,265
  Each of three Commissioned Officers...........   65,000
   "   "  Eight Warrant Officers................   21,600
   "   "  Twenty Officers.......................    9,030
   "   "  150 Seamen and Marines................    2,425
  The Captain of the _Favorite_.................  324,360
  Each of 2 Commissioned Officers...............   64,870
   "   "  77 Warrant Officers...................   30,268
   "   "  15 Petty Officers.....................    9,000
   "   "  100 Seamen and Marines................    2,420


In 1702 it happened that no treasure fleet had returned to Spain for
three years, and the gold and silver and costly merchandise were piling
up at Cartagena and Porto Bello and Vera Cruz waiting for shipment.
Spain was torn with strife over the royal succession, and inasmuch as
the king claimed as his own one-fifth of all the treasure coming from
the New World, the West India Company and the officials of the treasury
kept the galleons away until it should be known who had the better
right to the cargoes.  Moreover, the high seas were perilous for the
passage of treasure ships, what with the havoc wrought by the cursed
English men-of-war and privateers, not to mention the buccaneers of San
Domingo and the Windward Islands who had a trick of storming aboard a
galleon from any crazy little craft that would float a handful of them.

Timidly the galleons delayed until a fleet of French men-of-war was
sent out to convey them home, and at length this richest argosy that
ever furrowed blue water, freighted with three years' treasure from the
mines, made its leisurely way into mid-ocean by way of the Azores,
bound to the home port of Cadiz.  There were forty sail in all,
seventeen of the plate fleet, under Don Manuel de Velasco, and
twenty-three French ships-of-the-line and frigates obeying the
Admiral's pennant of the Count of Chateaurenaud.

The news came to Queen Anne that this fleet had departed from the
Spanish Main, and a squadron of twenty-seven British war vessels,
commanded by the famous Sir Cloudesley Shovel, was fitted out to
intercept and attack it.  The manoeuvres of the hunted galleons and
their convoy wear an aspect grimly humorous as pictured in the letters
and narratives of that time.  One of these explains that "the fleet was
performing its voyage always with the fear that the enemy was lying in
wait for it; the King of France also was in continual anxiety on the
same account, and urged by these forebodings he sent dispatches in
different vessels so that the fleet might avoid the threatened danger.
One of the dispatch boats met it on the open sea, and gave it notice of
the enemy's armada being over against Cadiz, upon which warning the
commander called a council of war in the ship _Capitana_ to consider
and fix upon the port which they ought to make for.  At this meeting
various views were expressed, for the French held that the fleet would
be more secure in the ports of France, and especially in that of
Rochelle.  Of the same opinion were many of the Spaniards, who were
looking not to the interests of individuals, but to the public good.

"And yet there were also seen the ill-consequences that might arise
from the treasure not being conveyed to its proper destination and the
possibility of the Most Christian King's finding some pretext which
would endanger its safety."

Which is to say that if "His Most Christian Majesty," Louis XIV of
France, who was safe-guarding the treasure, should once entice it into
one of his own ports, he was likely to keep it there.  And so the
courteous Spanish captains and the equally polite French captains eyed
one another suspiciously in the cabin of the galleon and held council
until it was decided to seek refuge in Vigo Bay on the coast of
Gallicia, thereby both dodging the English and remaining at a
sufficient distance from France to spoil any designs which might be
prompted by the greed of "His Most Christian Majesty."

======================================================================

[Illustration: The Royal Sovereign, one of Admiral Sir George Rooke's
line-of-battle ships, engaged at Vigo Bay.]

======================================================================

Without mishap, the treasure fleet and the convoy anchored in the
sheltered, narrow stretch of Vigo harbor, and preparations for standing
off an English attack were begun at once.  The forts were manned, the
militia called out, and a great chain boom stretched across the
entrance of the inner roadstead.  This was all very well in its way,
but so incredible a comedy of blundering, stupid delay ensued that
although for one whole month the galleons lay unmolested, the treasure
was not unloaded and carried to safety ashore.  In a letter from
Brussels, printed in the _London Postman_ of November 10, 1702, the
grave results of this Spanish procrastination were indicated in these
words:

"The last advices from Spain and Paris have caused great consternation
here.  The treasure and other goods brought by the said fleet are of
such consequence to Spain, and in particular to this province, that
most of our traders are ruined if this fleet is taken and destroyed."

While the English and their allies, the Dutch, were making ready to
take this treasure fleet bottled up in Vigo Bay, the officials of Spain
were so entangled in red tape that there seemed to be no way of
unloading the galleons.  A Spanish writer of that era thus describes
the lamentable state of affairs:

"The commerce of Cadiz maintained that nothing could be disembarked in
Gallicia,--that to unload the fleet was their privilege, and that the
ships ought to be kept safe in the harbor of Vigo, without discharging
their cargoes, till the enemies were gone away.  In addition to this,
the settlement of the matter in the Council of the Indies was not so
speedy as the emergency demanded,--both through the slowness and
prudence natural to the Spaniard, and through the diversity of opinions
on the subject."

Don Modesto Lafuento, a later Spanish historian, gravely explains that
"as the arrival of the fleet at this port was unexpected and contrary
to the usual custom, there was no officer to be found who could examine
merchandise for the payment of duties, without which no disembarkation
could be lawfully made.  When notice of this was at length sent to the
Court, much discussion arose there as to who should be sent.  They
fixed upon Don Juan de Larrea, but this councillor was in no hurry
about setting out on his journey, and spent a long time in making it,
and when he arrived he occupied himself with discussion about the
disposition of the goods that had come in the fleet.  This gave the
opportunity for the Anglo-Dutch fleet, which had notice of everything,
to set out and arrive in the waters of Vigo before the disembarkation
was effected."

Surely never was so much treasure so foolishly endangered, and although
a small part of it was taken ashore, notwithstanding the asinine
proceedings of the government and Don Juan de Larrea, the English
_Post_ newspaper of November 2, asserted that "the Spaniards, being
informed that the enemy's fleet was returned home, sent aboard a great
quantity of their plate which they had carried to land for fear of
them."

Admiral Sir Cloudesley Shovel had missed finding the treasure fleet at
sea, but a lucky chance favored another sterling English commander, Sir
George Rooke.  He was homeward bound from a disastrous attempt to take
Cadiz, in which affair the Duke of Ormond had led the troops engaged.
One of his ships, the _Pembroke_, was detached from the fleet and while
calling at Lagos Bay for water, the chaplain became friendly with a
gentleman of the port who passed him word that the galleons and the
French fleet were safe at Vigo.  This talkative informant proved to be
a messenger from Lisbon, sent by the German minister with dispatches
for the treasure fleet which he had first sought in vain at Cadiz.

The chaplain carried the rare tidings to Captain Hardy of the
_Pembroke_ who instantly made sail to find Sir George Rooke and the
English fleet, which was jogging along toward England.  The admiral was
"extream glad," says an old account, and "imparted the same immediately
to the Dutch Admiral, declaring it his opinion that they should go
directly to Vigo."  The Dutchman and his tars joyfully agreed, and
Dalrymple, in his memoirs, relates that "at the sound of treasure from
the South Seas, dejection and animosity ceased, and those who a few
days before would not speak when they met, now embraced and felicitated
each other, etc.  All the difficulties that had appeared to be
mountainous at Cadiz, dwindled into mole-hills at Vigo.

"The gunners agreed that their bombs would reach the town and the
shipping; the engineers, that lodgments and works could easily be made;
the soldiers, that there was no danger in landing; the seamen that the
passage of the Narrows could easily be forced, notwithstanding all the
defenses and obstructions; and the pilots, that the depth of water was
everywhere sufficient, and the anchorage safe.  Rooke's gout incommoded
him no longer; he went from ship to ship, even in the night time, and
became civil,--and the Duke of Ormond, with his father's generosity,
his brother's and his own, forgot all that was past."

These were the sentiments of men who had no more rations left aboard
ship than two biscuits per day, whose fleet was leaky, battered, and
unseaworthy after the hard fighting at Cadiz, and who were going to
attack a powerful array of French vessels, protected by numerous forts
and obstructions, and supported by the seventeen galleons which in
armament and crews were as formidable as men-of-war.  At a council of
flag officers called by Sir George Rooke, it was resolved:

"That, considering the attempting and destroying these ships would be
of the greatest advantage and honor to her Majesty and her allies, and
very much tend to the reducing of the power of France, the fleet should
make the best of its way to the port of Vigo, and insult them
immediately with the whole line in case there was room enough for it,
and if not, by such detachment as might render the attack most
effective."

In naval history no swifter and more deadly "insult" was ever
administered than that which befell when Sir George Rooke, his gout
forgotten, appeared before Vigo and lost no time in coming to close
quarters.  He called a council of the general land and sea officers who
concluded that "in regard the whole fleet could not without being in
danger of being in a huddle, attempt the ships and galleons where they
were, a detachment of fifteen English and ten Dutch ships of the line
of battle with all the fire ships should be sent to use their best
endeavors to take or destroy the aforesaid ships of the enemy, and the
frigates and bomb vessels should follow the rear of the fleet, and the
great ships move after them to go in if there should be occasion."

Next morning the Duke of Ormond landed two thousand British infantry to
take the forts and destroy the landward end of the boom, made of chain
cables and spars which blocked the channel.  These errands were
accomplished with so much spirit and determination that the Grenadiers
fairly chased the Spanish garrisons out of their works.  Rooke did not
wait for the finish of this task, but flew the signal to get under way,
Vice Admiral Hopson leading in the _Torbay_.  British and Dutch
together, the wind blowing half a gale behind them, surged toward the
inner harbor, stopped not for the boom but cut a way through it, and
became engaged with the French men-of-war at close range.  The hostile
fleets were so jammed together that it was not a battle of broadsides.
A Spanish chronicler related that "they fought with fires of inhuman
contrivance, hand grenades, fire-balls, and lumps of burning pitch."

Within one-half hour after the English and Dutch had gained entrance to
the bay, its surface was an inferno of blazing galleons and men-of-war.
Some of the French ships were carried with the cutlass and boarding
pike, but fire was the chief weapon used by both sides.  The flaming
vessels drifted against each other, some of them set purposely alight
and filled with explosives.  When the galleons tried to move further up
the bay, British troops on shore raked them with musketry, and
prevented the attempts to put some of the treasure on land.  The lofty
treasure ships, their huge citadels rising fore and aft, and gay with
carving and gilt, burned like so much tinder.

The English had no desire to destroy these golden prizes, and as soon
as the French fleet had been annihilated, every ship burned, sunk,
captured, or driven ashore, heroic efforts were made to save the
galleons still unharmed, "whereupon Don Manuel de Velasco, who was not
wanting in courage, but only in good fortune, ordered them to be set on
fire....  The enemy saw the greater part of the treasure sunk in the
sea.  Many perished seeking for riches in the middle of the flames;
these, with those who fell in the battle, were 800 English and Dutch;
500 were wounded, and one English three-decker was burnt.
Nevertheless, they took thirteen French and Spanish ships, seven of
which were men-of-war, and six merchantmen, besides some others much
damaged and half-burnt.  There fell 2000 Spaniards and French, few
escaped unwounded.

"The day after the bloody battle, they sent down into the water a great
many divers, but with little result, for the artillery of the city
hindered them.  So setting to work to embark their people, and covering
their masts with flags and streamers, they celebrated their victory
with flutes and fifes.  Thus they steered for their own ports, leaving
that country full of sadness and terror."

It was a prodigiously destructive naval engagement, the costliest in
point of material losses that history records.  The victors got much
booty to take home to England and the Netherlands, and were handsomely
rewarded for their pains.  Sir George Rooke carried to London the
galleon _Tauro_ which had escaped burning, and she had a mighty freight
of bullion in her hold.  Of this ship the _Post Boy_ newspaper made
mention, January 19, 1703:

"There was found in the galleon unloaded last week abundance of wrought
plate, pieces of eight, and other valuable commodities, and so much
that 'tis computed the whole cargo is worth L200,000."

All records of that time and event agree, however, that the treasure
saved by the allied fleet was no more than a small part of what was
lost by the wholesale destruction of the galleons, and chiefly
interesting to the present day are the most reliable estimates of the
amount of gold and silver that still rests embedded in the tidal silt
of Vigo Bay.  There were sunk in water too deep to be explored by the
engineers of that century eleven French men-of-war, and at least a
round dozen of treasure laden galleons.  The French fleet carried no
small amount of gold and silver which had been entrusted to the Admiral
and his officers by merchants of the West Indies.  As for the galleons,
the English _Post_ of November 13,1702, stated:

"Three Spanish officers belonging to the galleons, one of whom was the
Admiral of the Assogna ships, are brought over who report that the
effects that were on board amounted to nine millions sterling, and that
the Spaniards, for want of mules to carry the plate into the country,
had broke the bulk of very few ships before the English forced the
boom."

The amount of the treasure is greatly underestimated in the foregoing
assertion, for the annual voyage of the plate fleet had carried to
Spain an average lading worth from thirty to forty million dollars, and
this doomed flota bore the accumulated treasure of three years.  Not
more than ten million dollars in bullion and merchandise could have
been looted by the Dutch and English victors, according to the most
reliable official records.  Our enthusiastic friend, Signor Don Carlos
Iberti, he who had been "flying from province to province," in behalf
of the latest treasure company of Vigo Bay, dug deep into the musty
records of the "Account Books of the Ministry of Finance, of the
Colonies, of the Royal Treasury, of the Commercio of Cadiz, of the
Council of the West Indies," and so on, and can tell you to the last
peso how much gold and silver was sent from the mines of America in the
treasure fleets, and precisely the value of the shipments entrusted to
the magnificent flota of 1702.  A score of English authorities might be
quoted to confirm what has been said of the vastness of this lost
treasure.  The event was the sensation of the time in Europe, and many
pens were busy chronicling in divers tongues the details of the
catastrophe and the results thereof.  In a letter from Madrid which
reached England a few days after the event, the writer lamented:

"Yesterday an express arrived from Vigo with the melancholy news that
the English and Dutch fleets came before that place the 22nd past and
having made themselves masters of the mouth of the river, in less than
two hours took and burnt all the French men-of-war and galleons in the
harbour.  We have much greater reason to deplore our misfortune in
silence and tears than to give you a particular account of this
unspeakable loss, which will hasten the utter ruin of this our monarchy.

"The inhabitants of this place, not being able to re-collect themselves
from their consternation, have shut up their houses and shops for fear
of being plundered by the common people who exclaim publicly against
the government, and particularly against Cardinal Porto Carrero and
others of the Council, who not being content with the free gift of
three millions offered to the king out of the galleons, besides an
_indulto_ of two millions, hindered the landing of the plate at Vigo
before the enemy arrived there.  But the Cardinal laid the blame upon
the Consultat of Seville, who, mistrusting the French, would not suffer
them to carry the galleons to Brest or Port Lewis, but gave orders that
they should sail back from Vigo to Cadiz after the English and Dutch
fleets were returned home.  'Tis said that only three of the galleons
put their cargo ashore before the arrival of the enemy."

The news was a most bitter pill for His Christian Majesty, Louis XIV of
France, and put him and his court "into a mighty consternation."  He
was quoted as saying that "there was not one-tenth part of the plate
and merchandise landed from on board the fleet.  This is the most
facetious piece of news that could come to the enemies of France and
Spain."

All the records lay stress on the immense value of the treasure lost,
one that "the Spanish galleons were coming from Mexico overladen with
riches," another that "vast wealth in gold, silver, and merchandise was
lost in that terrible battle of Vigo," a third that "this was the
richest flota that ever came into Europe."  It is extraordinary that
most of this treasure has remained untouched for more than two
centuries at the bottom of Vigo Bay.  The records of the Spanish
government contain almost complete memoranda of every concession
granted to searching parties, and of the valuables recovered, which
total to date is no more than a million and a half of dollars.

Soon after the battle, Spain began to fish for her lost galleons and in
that same year of 1702, the official newspaper of Madrid recorded that
"we are instructed from Vigo that they are proceeding with success in
the raising of the precious burden belonging to the _Capitana_, and
_Almiranta_ of the Flota."  For some reason or other, the task was
shortly abandoned, and the work turned over to private enterprise and
companies which were granted special charters, the Crown demanding as
much as ninety-five per cent. of all the treasure recovered.  During
the half century following the loss of the fleet, as many as thirty of
these concessions were granted, but most of them accomplished nothing.
The first treasure hunter to achieve results worth mention was a
Frenchman, Alexandre Goubert, who went to work in 1728, and after
prodigious exertion succeeded in dragging almost ashore a hulk which
turned put to be no galleon but one of the men-of-war of his own
country, at which there was much merriment in "perfidious Albion."
This disgusted M. Goubert and he was heard of no more.

An Englishman, William Evans, tried a diving bell of his own invention
in the same century, and raised many plates of silver, but a Spanish
concessionaire, jealous of this good fortune, persuaded his government
that it was in bad taste to let history repeat itself by giving the
English another fling at the treasure.  In 1825, time having softened
these poignant memories, a Scotchman was permitted to work in the bay,
and local tradition affirms that he found much gold and silver,
outwitting the officials at Madrid who demanded eighty per cent. of his
findings.  The inspectors posted to keep watch of his operations he
made comfortably drunk, bundled them ashore, clapped sail on his
brigantine, and vanished with his booty.  Later a castle was built near
Perth in Scotland, and given the name of Dollar House.  Here the
Scotchman aforesaid "lived happily ever afterwards" for all that is
known to the contrary.

Through the eighteenth century French, English, and Spanish exploring
parties were intriguing, quarreling, buying one another out, now and
then finding some treasure, and locating the positions of most of the
galleons.  In 1822, American treasure hunters invaded the bay,
organized as the International Submarine Company, and hailing from
Philadelphia.  Nothing worth mention was done until these adventurous
gentlemen after a good deal of bickering, made a fresh start under the
name of the Vigo Bay Treasure Company.  Their affairs dragged along for
a half century or so, during which they lifted one galleon from the
bottom but the weight of mud in her hull broke her to small bits.  A
Spanish war-vessel watched the operations, by night and day, the
government being somewhat sensitive and suspicious ever since the
flight of that Scotchman and his brigantine.

At last the American company was unable to get a renewal of its long
drawn out concession, and for some time the galleons were left alone.
It was in 1904, that Signor Don Carlos Iberti obtained the "Royal
Decree of Concession" for the Pino Company, Limited, of Genoa, and now
indeed there was to be treasure seeking in earnest.

"Until recently the search for the treasure in the Bay of Vigo seemed
only an Utopian mania," cried Iberti.  "Those who set about the arduous
enterprise were taken for mad scientists, rascals, or deceivers of
innocent speculators.  But for my part I shall always admire those
bands of adventurers who sought to recover this treasure, from the
first day after the battle until the present time."

======================================================================

[Illustration: Framework of an "elevator" devised by Pino for raising
the galleons in Vigo Bay.]

An "elevator" with air bags inflated.  Photographed in Vigo Bay.

(_By permission of The World's Work, London._)

======================================================================

Pino's first invention was a submarine boat which was tested with
brilliant success before putting it into service at Vigo Bay.  For the
preliminary work of treasure finding, he perfected his hydroscope, a
kind of sea telescope consisting of a floating platform from which
depend a series of tubes ending in a chamber equipped with electric
lamps, lenses and reflectors, like so many gigantic eyes through which
the observer is able to view the illuminated bottom of bay or ocean.

To lift the galleons bodily is Pino's plan, and he has devised what he
calls "elevators" or clusters of great bags of waterproofed canvas each
capable of raising forty tons in the water when pumped full of air.
These are placed in the hull of the sunken ship or attached outside,
and when made buoyant by means of powerful air pumps, exert a lifting
force easily comprehended.  In addition, this ingenious Italian
engineer, who has made a science of treasure seeking, makes use of
metal arms capable of embracing a rotting, flimsy hull, huge tongs
which are operated by a floating equipment of sufficient engine power
to lift whatever is made fast to.  The Japanese government successfully
employed his submarine inventions in raising the Russian war ships sunk
at Port Arthur.

Already one of the Spanish galleons has been brought to the surface of
Vigo Bay, but she happened to have been laden with costly merchandise
instead of plate, and her cargo was long since ruined by water and
corrosion.  The list of articles recovered during the searches of
recent years is a fascinating catalogue to show that the story of the
lost fleet is a true romance of history.  I quote Iberti who dwells
with so much joyous enthusiasm over "the anchors, including that of the
_Misericordia_, of Santa Cruz, guns of different caliber, wood of
various kinds, thirty gun carriages, wheels, mortars, silver spoons,
mariner's compasses, enormous cables, innumerable balls and bombs,
statuettes of inlaid gold, magnificently engraved pipe holders, Mexican
porcelain, tortas, or plates of silver, some weighing as much as eighty
pounds; gold pieces stamped by the Royal Mint of Mexico and ingots from
Peru."

======================================================================

[Illustration: Cannon of the treasure galleons recovered by Pino from
the bottom of Vigo Bay.]

Hydroscope invented by Pino for exploring the sea bottom and
successfully used in finding the galleons of Vigo Bay.

(_By permission of The World's Work, London._)

======================================================================

The latest of the concession held by Pino and his company whose
shareholders have invested large sums of real money, is an unusual
document in that bona-fide treasure seeking seems so incongruous an
industry in this twentieth century.  It bears the signature of His
Excellency Don Jose Ferrandiz, Minister of the Royal Navy, and was
granted on August 24, 1907, to be in force until 1915.  The wording
runs thus:

"With this date, I say to the Director General of the Mercantile Marine
as follows:

"Most Excellent Sir,--Having taken into consideration the petition
presented by the Italian subject, Don Carlos Iberti, representing Cav.
Don Jose Pino, inventor of the hydroscope apparatus for seeing,
photographing, and recovering objects sunk to the bottom of the sea, in
which petition he explains that he obtained a Concession for the term
of eight years to exploit what there is in the Bay of Vigo appertaining
to the galleons which came from America, which Concession was published
in the _Gaceta Official_ of the 5th of January, 1904; that he was at
the Bay of Vigo from the month of April until the end of the said year,
carrying on dredging operations; but unforeseen difficulties prevented
them from effecting a real and direct exploitation, so that the work
accomplished was only preliminary, as that of seeing, examining, and
studying the difficulties of the submarine bed, and the conditions in
which the submerged galleons are; that having obtained all these data
necessary for undertaking the work for recovery, in accord with the
Commander of the Marine at Vigo, and other gentlemen who constitute the
Council of Inspection, they suspended the operations in order to study
and construct new apparatus, more powerful and more adapted to this
kind of operation, and they returned to Italy with the intention of
going again to Vigo as soon as they had finished the new appliances
with which to complete the work of recovery; that they have already
spent large sums there, the greater part of which have gone to benefit
the inhabitants of Vigo; that in view of all this that has been put
forward he prays for an extension on the same terms in which the
Concession was granted:

"Considering, that by granting him the solicited extension, the State
interests would not be prejudiced, on the condition of its receiving 20
per cent. of all that is recovered, irrespective of the artistic and
historic value of the objects recovered:

"_His Majesty the King_ in accord with what has been proposed by the
Council of Ministers, has deigned to grant the solicited extension on
the same conditions which were already put in the concession, which
are:--

"First,--The Concessionaire shall utilize for all manual labor which
shall be necessary, the small craft of the locality and sailors of the
maritime department.

"Second,--The work once commenced shall be carried on without
interruption unless there shall be justifiable cause to hinder it.

"Third,--He undertakes to give to the State 20 per cent. of the value
of the objects recovered.

"Fourth,--In fulfilment of what has been established by Art. 351 of the
Civil Code, if any objects of interest to science or art or of any
historic value should be extracted, they shall be given to the State,
if it requires, and the State will pay the fair price, which will be
fixed by experts, taking into account the expenses of their recovery.

"Which by Royal Decree I have the pleasure to announce to you for your
knowledge and satisfaction.  May God preserve you for many years."

This long-winded proclamation seems faintly to echo of another and far
distant day "appertaining to the galleons which came from America,"
that day on which the news of the catastrophe was received in the
palace of Madrid.  Gabriel de Savoy, the child queen, then only
fourteen years old and wed to Philip V, heard the tidings of the battle
of Vigo Bay, "on the day and hour which was fixed upon for her to go in
public to give thanks to the Virgin of Atocha for the triumphs of the
king, and to place in that temple the banners captured from the enemy
in Italy.  This wise lady lamented bitterly such fatal news, but not
wishing to discourage and afflict her people, she put on courage, and
resolving to go forth presented herself with so serene a countenance as
to impose upon all, who were astonished at her courage, and the
ceremony was performed as if nothing had happened."

Vigo to-day is a pretty and thriving town of 30,000 people, with a
large trade by sea, and fertile fields stretching between bay and
mountain.  Round about are the ancient forts and castles which were
stormed and battered by the grenadiers of the Duke of Ormond and the
guns of the British and Dutch ships under Sir George Rooke.  Vigo won a
melancholy renown on that terrific day so long ago, and its blue waters
have a haunting interest even now, recalling the glory of the age of
the galleons and the wild romance of their voyaging from the Spanish
Main.  Perhaps the ingenious Don Jose Pino, with his modern machinery,
may find the greatest treasure ever lost, certain as he is that "in dim
green depths rot ingot-laden ships, with gold doubloons that from the
drowned hand fell."  At any rate, there is treasure-trove in the very
story of that fight in Vigo Bay, in the contrast between the timid,
blundering, procrastinating Spanish, afraid to leave their gold and
silver in the galleons, yet afraid to unload it; and the instant
decision of the English admiral who cared not a rap for the odds.  His
business it was to smash the French fleet and destroy the plate ships,
and he went about it like the ready, indomitable sea dog that he was.

Among the English state papers is the manuscript log-book of the
captain of the Torbay, flag ship of Vice Admiral Hopson who led the
attack.  This is how a fighting seaman of the old school disposed of so
momentous and severe a naval action as that of Vigo Bay, as if it were
no more than a common-place item in the day's work:

"This 24 hours little wind, the latter part much rain and dirty
weather.  Yesterday about 3 in the afternoon we anchored before Vigo
Town in 15 fathoms water.  This morning Vice Admiral Hopson hoisted the
red flag at our fore-topmast head in order to go ahead of the fleet to
defeat the French and Spanish galleons which lay up the river.  About
noon we weighed, having sent our soldiers on there to engage the forts
which opposed our coming.  We being come near, the forts fired at us.

"About one o'clock, coming across the forts which were on each side the
harbor, they fired smartly at us, and we fired our guns at both sides
of them again, and went past and broke the boom which crossed the river
to hinder our passage so that 4 and 5 men-of-war engaged us at once,
but soon deserted, firing and burnt their ships.  They sent a fireship
which set us on fire."

It was a very simple business, to hear the captain of the _Torbay_ tell
it, but the golden empire of Spain was shaken from Cadiz to Panama, and
gouty, dauntless Sir George Rooke helped mightily to hasten the end
which was finally brought about by another admiral, George Dewey by
name, in that Manila Bay whence the treasure galleons of the East
Indies _flota_ had crossed the Pacific to add their wealth to the
glittering cargoes gathered by the Viceroys of Mexico and Peru.




CHAPTER IX

THE PIRATES' HOARD OF TRINIDAD

Of all the freebooters' treasure for which search is still made by
means of curious information having to do with charts and other
plausible records, the most famous are those buried on Cocos Islands in
the Pacific and on the rocky islet of Trinidad in the South Atlantic.
These places are thousands of miles apart, the former off the coast of
Costa Rica, the latter several hundred miles from the nearest land of
Brazil and not to be confused with the better known British colony of
Trinidad in the Leeward Islands group of the West Indies.

Each of these treasures is of immense value, to be reckoned in millions
of dollars, and their stories are closely interwoven because the
plunder came from the same source at about the same time.  Both
narratives are colored by piracy, bloodshed and mystery, that of Cocos
Island perhaps the more luridly romantic of the two by reason of an
earlier association with the English buccaneers of Dampier's crew.
Each island has been dug over and ransacked at frequent intervals
during the last century, and it is safe to predict that expeditions
will be fitting out for Cocos or Trinidad for many years to come.

The history of these notable treasures is a knotty skein to
disentangle.  Athwart its picturesque pages marches a numerous company
of bold and imaginative liars, every man of them ready to swear on a
stack of Bibles that his is the only true, unvarnished version of the
events which caused the gold and jewels and plate to be hidden.
However, when all the fable and fancy are winnowed out, the facts
remaining are enough to make any red-blooded adventurer yearn to
charter a rakish schooner and muster a crew of kindred spirits.

During the last days of Spanish rule on the west coast of South
America, the wealthiest city left of that vast domain won by the
Conquistadores and held by the Viceroys, was Lima, the capital of Peru.
Founded in 1535 by Francisco Pizarro, it was the seat of the government
of South America for centuries.  The Viceregal court was maintained in
magnificent state, and the Archbishop of Lima was the most powerful
prelate of the continent.  Here the religious orders and the
Inquisition had their centers.  Of the almost incredible amount of gold
and silver taken from the mines of the country, much remained in Lima
to pile up fortunes for the grandees and officials, or to be fashioned
into massy ornaments for the palaces, residences, churches, and for the
great cathedral which still stands to proclaim the grandeur that was
Spain's in the olden days.

======================================================================

[Illustration: Lima Cathedral]

======================================================================

When Bolivar, the Liberator, succeeded in driving the Spanish out of
Venezuela, and in 1819 set up the free republic of Colombia, the ruling
class of Peru took alarm which increased to panic as soon as it was
known that the revolutionary forces were organizing to march south and
assault Lima itself.  There was a great running to and fro among the
wealthy Spanish merchants, the holders of fat positions under the
Viceroy, and the gilded idlers who swaggered and ruffled it on riches
won by the swords of their two-fisted ancestors.  It was feared that
the rebels of Bolivar and San Martin would loot the city, and
confiscate the treasure, both public and private, which consisted of
bullion, plate, jewels, and coined gold.

Precious property to the value of six million sterling was hurried into
the fortress of Lima for safe keeping and after the capture of the city
by the army of liberation, Lord Dundonald, the English Admiral in
command of the Chilian fleet assisting the revolutionists, offered to
let the Spanish governor depart with two-thirds of this treasure if he
would surrender the remainder and give up the fortifications without a
fight.  The Peruvian liberator, San Martin, set these terms aside,
however, and allowed the Spanish garrison to evacuate the place,
carrying away the six million sterling.  This immense treasure was soon
scattered far and wide, by sea and land.  It was only part of the
riches dispersed by the conquest of San Martin and his patriots.  The
people of Lima, hoping to send their fortunes safe home to Spain before
the plundering invaders should make a clean sweep, put their valuables
on board all manner of sailing vessels which happened to be in harbor,
and a fugitive fleet of merchantmen steered out from the hostile coast
of Peru, the holds piled with gold and silver, the cabins crammed with
officials of the state and church and other residents of rank and
station.  At the same time there was sent to sea the treasure of the
great cathedral of Lima, all its jeweled chalices, monstrances, and
vestments, the solid gold candle-sticks and shrines, the vast store of
precious furniture and ornaments, which had made this one of the
richest religious edifices of the world.

There had not been so much dazzling booty afloat at one time since the
galleon plate fleets were in their heyday during the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries.  In 1820 there were no more of those great
buccaneers and gentlemen adventurers who had singed the beard of the
King of Spain in the wake of Francis Drake.  They had sailed and fought
and plundered for glory as well as gain, or for revenge as much as for
doubloons.  Their successors as sea rovers were pirates of low degree,
base wretches of a sordid commercialism who preyed on honest merchant
skippers of all flags, and had little taste for fighting at close
quarters.  The older race of sea rogues had been wolves; the pirates of
the early nineteenth century were jackals.

Many a one of these gentry got wind of the fabulous treasure that had
been sent afloat from Lima, and there is no doubt that much of it
failed to reach Spain.  While in some instances, these fleeing ships
were boarded and scuttled by pirate craft, in others the lust of gold
was too strong for the seamen to whom the rare cargoes had been
entrusted, and they rose and took the riches away from their hapless
passengers.  It has been believed by one treasure seeking expedition
after another, even to this day, that Captain Thompson of the British
trading brig, _Mary Dear_ received on board in the harbor of Lima as
much as twelve million dollars' worth of gold and silver, and that he
and his crew, after killing the Spanish owners, sailed north in the
Pacific and buried the booty on Cocos Island.

Captain Thompson somehow escaped and joined a famous pirate of that
time, Benito Bonito, who accumulated a large treasure which he also
buried on Cocos Island.  The British Admiralty records show that Bonito
was overhauled in his turn by the frigate _Espiegle_ and that rather
than be hanged in chains, he very handsomely blew out his brains on his
own deck.

This same treasure of Lima, or part of it, furnished the foundation of
the story belonging to the volcanic islet of Trinidad in the South
Atlantic.  One version of this is that the pirates who chose this
hiding-place had been the crew of a fast English schooner in the slave
trade.  While at sea they disposed of their captain by the unpleasant
method of pinning him to the mainmast with a boarding pike through his
vitals.  Then the black flag was hoisted and with a new skipper they
stood to the southward, finding a great amount of plunder in a
Portuguese ship which had on board a "Jew diamond dealer" among other
valuable items.  After taking an East Indiaman, and other tempting
craft, they buried the total proceeds on the desolate, uninhabited
island of Trinidad, intending to return for it before the end of the
cruise.

Unfortunately, for the successful pirates, they ran afoul of a heavily
armed and manned merchant vessel which shot away their rudder, tumbled
their spars about their rascally ears, boarded them with great spirit
and determination, and clapped the shackles on the twenty gentlemen of
fortune who had survived the engagement.  These were carried into
Havana and turned over to the Spanish authorities who gleefully hanged
nineteen, not twenty, mark you, for one had to make a marvelous escape
in order to hand down the secret of the treasure to posterity.  This
survivor died in bed in England at a very great age, so the story runs,
and of course he had a chart to set the next generation to digging.

The earlier statements of this narrative may be cast aside as
worthless.  The real, true pirate of Trinidad was not in the slave
schooner which captured the "Jew diamond dealer" of the Portuguese
ship.  An odd confusion of facts caused the mistake.  While Benito
Bonito was harrying the Spanish shipping of the Pacific and burying his
treasure on Cocos Island, there was on the Atlantic a bloodthirsty
pirate by the name of Benito de Soto.  He was a Spaniard who sailed out
of Buenos Aires in the year 1827, bound to Africa to smuggle a cargo of
slaves.  The crew was composed of French, Spanish, and Portuguese
desperadoes, and led by the mate and De Soto they marooned the captain
and ran away with the ship on a pirate voyage.  They plundered and
burned and slaughtered without mercy, their most nefarious exploit
being the capture of the British merchant ship _Morning Star_, bound
from Ceylon to England in 1828, and carrying as passengers several army
officers and their wives and twenty-five invalided soldiers.  After the
most fiendish conduct, De Soto and his crew, drove the survivors into
the hold of the _Morning Star_, and fastened the hatches, leaving the
vessel to founder, for they had taken care to bore numerous auger holes
in her bottom.  By a miracle of good fortune, the prisoners forced the
hatches and were taken off next day by a passing vessel.

Benito de Soto met his end as the result of being wrecked in his own
ship off the Spanish coast.  He was caught in Gibraltar and hanged by
the English Governor.  An army officer who saw him turned off related
that he was a very proper figure of a pirate, "there was no driveling
fears upon him,--he walked firmly at the tail of the fatal cart, gazing
sometimes at his coffin, sometimes at the crucifix which he held in his
hand.  This he frequently pressed to his lips, repeated the prayers
spoken in his ear by the attendant clergyman, and seemed regardless of
everything but the world to come.  The gallows was erected beside the
water, and fronting neutral ground.  He mounted the cart as firmly as
he had walked behind it, and held up his face to Heaven and the beating
rain, calm, resigned, but unshaken; and finding the halter too high for
his neck, he boldly stepped upon his coffin, and placed his head in the
noose.  Then watching the first turn of the wheels, he murmured,
'farewell, all,' and leaned forward to facilitate his fall ... The
black boy was acquitted at Cadiz, but the men who had fled to the
Caracas, as well as those arrested after the wreck, were convicted,
executed, their limbs severed and hung on iron hooks, as a warning to
all other pirates."

This Benito, who died so much better than he had lived, was not hanged
at Havana, it will be perceived, and the version of the Trinidad
treasure story already outlined is apparently a hodgepodge of the
careers of Benito de Soto, and of Benito of Cocos Island, with a flavor
of fact in so far as it refers to the twenty pirates who were carried
to Cuba to be strung up, or garroted.  The Spanish archives of that
island record that this gang was executed and that they had been found
guilty of plundering ships sailing from Lima shortly after the city had
been entered by the revolutionists.  Their association with the island
of Trinidad is explained herewith as it was told to E. F. Knight, an
Englishman, who organized and commanded an expedition which sailed in
search of the treasure in 1889.

There was at that time near Newcastle, England, a retired sea captain
who had been in command of an East Indiaman engaged in the opium trade
in the years 1848 to 1850.  "The China seas were then infested by
pirates," said Mr. Knight's informant, "so that his vessel carried a
few guns and a larger crew than is usual in these days.  He had four
quarter-masters, one of whom was a foreigner.  The captain was not sure
of his nationality but thought he was a Finn.  On board the vessel the
man went under the name of 'The Pirate' because of a deep scar across
his cheek which gave him a somewhat sinister appearance.  He was a
reserved man, better educated than the ordinary sailor, and possessing
a good knowledge of navigation.

"The captain took a liking to him, and showed him kindness on various
occasions.  This man was attacked by dysentery on the voyage from China
to Bombay, and by the time the vessel reached port he was so ill, in
spite of the captain's nursing, that he had to be taken to the
hospital.  He gradually sank, and when he found that he was dying he
told the captain, who frequently visited him, that he felt very
grateful for the kind treatment given him, and that he would prove his
gratitude by revealing a secret which might make his captain one of the
richest men in England.  He then asked the skipper to go to his chest
and take out from it a parcel.  This contained a piece of old tarpaulin
with a plan of an island of Trinidad upon it.

"The dying soldier told him that at the spot indicated, that is at the
base of the mountain known as Sugar Loaf, there was an immense treasure
buried, consisting principally of gold and silver plate and ornaments,
the plunder of Peruvian churches which certain pirates had concealed
there in the year 1821.  Much of this plate, he said, came from the
cathedral of Lima, having been carried away from there during the war
of independence, when the Spaniards were escaping the country and that
among other riches were several massive gold candle-sticks.

"He further stated that he was the only survivor of the pirates, as all
the others had been captured by the Spaniards and executed in Cuba some
years before, and consequently it was probable that no one but himself
knew the secret.  He then gave the captain instructions as to the exact
position of the treasure in the bay under the Sugar Loaf, and enjoined
him to go there and search for it, as it was almost certain that it had
not been removed."

Mr. Knight, who was a young barrister of London, investigated this
story with much diligence, and discovered that the captain aforesaid
had sent his son to Trinidad in 1880 to try to identify the marks shown
on the old pirate's tarpaulin chart.  He landed from a sailing ship,
did no digging for lack of equipment, but reported that the place
tallied exactly with the description, although a great landslide of
reddish earth had covered the place where the treasure was hid.  This
evidence was so convincing that in 1885 an expedition was organized
among several adventurous gentlemen of South Shields who chartered a
bark of six hundred tons, the _Aurea_, and fitted her at a large outlay
with surf boats, picks, shovels, timber, blasting powder, and other
stores.  This party found the island almost inaccessible because of the
wild, rock-bound coast, the huge breakers which beat about it from all
sides, and the lack of harbors and safe anchorage.  After immense
difficulty, eight men were landed, with a slender store of provisions
and a few of the tools.  The dismal aspect of the island, the armies of
huge land crabs which tried to devour them, the burning heat, and the
hard labor without enough food or water, soon disheartened this band of
treasure seekers, and they dug no more than a small trench before
courage and strength forsook them.  Signaling to their ships, they were
taken off, worn out and ill, and thus ended the efforts of the
expedition.

In the same year, an American skipper chartered a French sailing vessel
in Rio Janeiro, and sailed for Trinidad with four Portuguese sailors to
do his digging for him.  They were ashore several days, but found no
treasure, and vanished from the story after this brief fling with the
dice of fortune.  Now, Knight was of different stuff from these other
explorers.  He was a first-class amateur seaman who had sailed his
yacht _Falcon_ to South America in 1880, and was both experienced and
capable afloat and ashore.  While bound from Montevideo to Bahia he had
touched at Trinidad, curious to see this remote islet so seldom
visited.  This was before he heard the buried treasure story.
Therefore when he became acquainted, several years later, with the
chart and information left by the old pirate, he was able to verify the
details of his own knowledge, and he roundly affirmed:

"In the first place, his carefully prepared plan of the island, the
minute directions he gave as to the best landing, and his description
of the features of the bay on whose shores the treasure was concealed,
prove beyond doubt to myself and others who know Trinidad, that he, or
if not himself some informant of his, had landed on this so rarely
visited islet; and not only landed but passed some time on it, and
carefully surveyed the approaches to the bay, so as to be able to point
out the dangers and show the safest passage through the reefs.  This
information could not have been obtained from any pilot-book.  The
landing recommended by previous visitors is at the other side of the
island.  This bay is described by them as inaccessible, and the
indications on the Admiralty chart are completely erroneous.

"And beyond this, the quartermaster must have been acquainted with what
was taking place in two other distant portions of the world during the
year of his professed landing on the desert island.  He knew of the
escape of pirates with the cathedral plate of Lima.  He was also aware
that, shortly afterwards, there were hanged in Cuba the crew of a
vessel that had committed acts of piracy on the Peruvian coast.

"It is scarcely credible that an ordinary seaman,--even allowing that
he was superior in education to the average of his fellows,--could have
pieced these facts together so ingeniously into this plausible story."

This argument has merit and it was persuasive enough to cause Knight to
buy the staunch cutter _Alerte_, muster a company of gentlemen
volunteers, ship a crew, and up anchor from Southampton for Trinidad.

There was never a better found treasure expedition than this in the
_Alerte_.  The nine partners, each of whom put up one hundred pounds
toward the expenses, were chosen from one hundred and fifty eager
applicants.  Articles of agreement provided that one-twentieth of the
treasure recovered was to be received by each adventurer and he in turn
bound himself to work hard and obey orders.  In the equipment was a
drilling apparatus for boring through earth and rock, an hydraulic jack
for lifting huge bowlders, portable forge and anvil, iron
wheel-barrows, crow-bars, shovels and picks galore, a water distilling
plant, a rapid fire gun, and a full complement of repeating rifles and
revolvers.

A few days before the _Alerte_ was ready to sail from Southampton an
elderly naval officer boarded the cutter and was kind enough to inform
Mr. Knight of another buried treasure which he might look for on his
route to Trinidad.  The story had been hidden for many years among the
documents of the Admiralty, and as a matter of government record, it
is, of course, perfectly authentic.  In 1813, the Secretary of the
Admiralty instructed Sir Richard Bickerton, commanding at Portsmouth,
to send in the first King's ship touching at Madeira a seaman who had
given information concerning a hidden treasure, in order that the truth
of his story might be tested.

The Admiralty order was entrusted to Captain Hercules Robinson of the
_Prometheus_ and in his report he states that "after being introduced
to the foreign seaman referred to in the above letter, and reading the
notes which had been taken of his information, he charged him to tell
no person what he knew or what was his business, that he was to mess
with the captain's coxswain, and that no duty would be required of him.
To this the man replied that that was all he desired, that he was
willing to give his time, and would ask no remuneration for his
intelligence."

While the _Prometheus_ was anchored at Funchal, Madeira, Captain
Robinson closely questioned the mysterious seaman whose name was
Christian Cruse.  He declared that he had been in a hospital ill of
yellow fever, several years before, and with him was a shipmate, a
Spaniard, who died of the same malady.  Before his death he told Cruse
that in 1804 he had been in a Spanish ship, from South America to
Cadiz, with two millions of silver in chests.  When nearing the coast
of Spain, they were signaled by a neutral vessel that England had
declared war and that Cadiz was blockaded.  Rather than risk capture by
the British fleet, and unwilling to run all the way back to South
America, the captain resolved to try to gain the nearest of the West
Indies and save his treasure.

Passing to the southward of Madeira, a cluster of small, uninhabited
islands, called the Salvages, was sighted.  Thereupon the crew decided
that it was foolishness to continue the voyage.  The captain was
accordingly stabbed to death with a dirk, and the ship steered to an
anchorage.  The chests of Spanish dollars were landed in a small bay, a
deep trench dug in the sand above highwater mark, and the treasure
snugly buried, the body of the captain deposited in a box on top of it.
The mutineers then sought the Spanish Main where they intended to burn
their ship, buy a small vessel under British colors, and return to
carry off the two million dollars.

Near Tobago they suffered shipwreck because of poor navigation and only
two were saved.  One died ashore, and the other was the Spanish seaman
who made the dying declaration to Christian Cruse in the hospital at
Vera Cruz.

Captain Hercules Robinson was a seasoned officer of His Majesty's navy,
used to taking sailors' yarns with a grain of salt, but that he was
convinced of the good faith of Christian Cruse and of the truth of the
narrative is shown by his interesting comments, as he wrote them down a
century ago:

"May Cruse not have had some interested object in fabricating this
story?  Why did he not tell it before?  Is not the cold-blooded murder
inconceivable barbarity, and the burying the body over the treasure too
dramatic and buccaneer-like?  Or might not the Spaniard have lied from
love of lying and mystifying his simple shipmate, or might he not have
been raving?

"As to the first difficulty, I have the strongest conviction of the
honesty of Christian Cruse, and I think I could hardly be grossly
deceived as to his character, and his disclaiming any reward unless the
discovery was made, went to confirm my belief that he was an honest
man.  And then as to his withholding the information for four or five
years, be it remembered that the war with Denmark might have truly shut
him out from any intercourse with England.  Next as to the wantonness
and indifference with which the murder was perpetrated, I am afraid
there is no great improbability in this.  I have witnessed a disregard
of human life in matters of promotion in our service, etc., which makes
the conduct of these Spaniards under vehement temptation, and when they
could do as they pleased, sufficiently intelligible.

"But certainly the coffin over the treasure looked somewhat theatrical
and gave it the air of Sadler's Wells, or a novel, rather than matter
of fact.  I enquired, therefore, from Christian Cruse why the body of
the captain was thus buried, and he replied that he understood the
object was, that in case any person should find the marks of their
proceedings and dig to discover what they had been about, they might
come to the body and go no further."

After further reflection, Captain Robinson convinced himself that the
Spanish seaman had been clear-headed when he made his confession to
Cruse, and that it would have been beyond him deliberately to invent
the statement as fiction.  The _Prometheus_ was headed for the
Salvages, and arriving off the largest of these islands, a bay was
found and a level white patch of beach above high water mark situated
as had been described to Christian Cruse.  Fifty sailors were sent
ashore to dig with shovels and boarding pikes, making the sand fly in
the hope of winning the reward of a hundred dollars offered to the man
who found the murdered captain's coffin.

The search lasted only one day because the anchorage was unsafe and
Captain Robinson was under orders to return to Madeira.  Arriving
there, other orders recalled his ship to England for emergency duty and
the treasure hunt was abandoned.  So far as known, no other attempt had
been made to find the chests of dollars until Mr. Knight decided to act
on the information and explore the Salvages in passing.

Of this little group of islands it was decided by the company of the
_Alerte_ that the one called the Great Piton most closely answered the
description given Christian Cruse by the Spanish pirate.  A bay was
found with a strip of white sand above high-water mark, and Mr. Knight
and his shipmates pitched a camp nearby and had the most sanguine
expectations of bringing to light the rude coffin of the murdered
captain.

A series of trenches was opened up after a systematic plan, and some
crumbling bones discovered, but the ship's surgeon refused to swear
that they had belonged to a human being.  The trouble was that the
surface of the place had been considerably changed by the action of
waves and weather, which made the Admiralty charts of a century before
very misleading.  The destination of the _Alerte_ was Trinidad, after
all, and the visit to the Salvages was only an incident, so the search
was abandoned after four days.  In all probability, the treasure of the
Salvages is still in its hiding-place, and any adventurous young
gentlemen seeking a field of operations will do well to consult for
themselves the documentary evidence of Captain Hercules Robinson and
Christian Cruse, as filed among the records of the British Admiralty
Office.

Trinidad is a much more difficult island to explore than any of the
Salvages group.  In fact, this forbidding mass of volcanic rock is a
little bit of inferno.  It is sometimes impossible to make a landing
through the surf for weeks at a time, and when a boat makes the attempt
in the most favorable circumstances, the venture is a hazard of life
and death.  As a vivid summary of the aspect of this lonely treasure
island, I quote from Mr. Knight, because he is the only man who has
ever described Trinidad at first hand:

"As we neared it, the features of this extraordinary place could
gradually be distinguished.  The north side, that which faced us, is
the most barren and desolate portion of the island, and appears to be
utterly inaccessible.  Here the mountains rise sheer from the boiling
surf,--fantastically shaped of volcanic rock; cloven by frightful
ravines; lowering in perpendicular precipices; in places overhanging
threateningly, and, where the mountains have been shaken to pieces by
the fires and earthquakes of volcanic action, huge landslips slope
steeply in the yawning ravines,--landslips of black and red volcanic
debris, and loose rocks large as houses, ready on the slightest
disturbance to roll down, crashing, into the abysses below.  On the
summit of the island there floats almost constantly, even on the
clearest day, a wreath of dense vapor, never still, but rolling and
twisting into strange shapes as the wind eddies among the crags.  And
above this cloud-wreath rise mighty pinnacles of coal-black rock, like
the spires of some gigantic Gothic cathedral piercing the blue southern
sky.  It would be impossible to convey in words a just idea of the
mystery of Trinidad.  The very coloring seemed unearthly, in places
dismal black, and in others the fire-consumed crags are of strange
metallic hues, vermilion red and copper yellow.  When one lands on its
shores, this uncanny impression is enhanced.  It bears all the
appearances of being an accursed spot, whereupon no creatures can live,
save the hideous land-crabs and foul and cruel sea birds."

An ideal place, this, for pirates to bury treasure, you will agree, and
good for nothing else under Heaven.  The South Atlantic Directory, the
shipmaster's guide, states that "the surf is often incredibly great,
and has been seen to break over a bluff which is two hundred feet
high."  Trinidad was first visited by Halley, the astronomer, after
whom the famous comet was named, who called there in 1700 when he was a
captain in the Royal Navy.  Captain Amos Delano, the Yankee pioneer in
the Far Eastern trade, made a call in 1803, prompted by curiosity, but
as a rule mariners have given the island a wide berth, now and then
touching there when in need of water or fresh meat in the shape of
turtles.

At one time the Portuguese attempted to found a settlement on Trinidad,
probably before the forests had been killed by some kind of volcanic
upheaval.  The ruins of their stone huts are still to be seen as humble
memorials of a great race of explorers and colonists in the golden age
of that nation.

With tremendous exertion, the party from the _Alerte_ was landed with
its tools and stores, and headquarters established close to the ravine
which was believed to be the hiding-place of the treasure as indicated
by the chart and information of the Finn quartermaster with the scar
across his cheek.  It was found that there had been no actual
landslide, but the ravine was choked with large bowlders which at
various times had fallen from the cliffs above.  These were packed
together by the red earth silting and washing during the rainy season
when the ravines were flooded.

Along the whole of the windward coast were found innumerable fragments
of wreckage, spars, timbers, barrels.  From the position of the island,
in the belt of the southeast trade winds, many derelict vessels must
have been driven ashore.  Some of this immense accumulation of stuff
may have lain there for centuries, or ever since vessels first doubled
the Cape of Good Hope.  Here and there were the gaunt rows of ribs to
show where a ship had been stranded bodily, and doubtless much valuable
property in silver and gold, in bars, ingots, and doubloons, lies
buried in the shattered hulks of these old Dutch East Indiamen, and
galleons from Peru.

As particular landmarks near the ravine, the pirate had mentioned three
cairns which he and his comrades had heaped up.  Sure enough, the
previous treasure seekers of the _Aurea_ expedition from England had
found the three cairns, but foolishly demolished them on the chance
that gold might be buried underneath.  Mr. Knight could find traces of
only one of them, and he discovered also a water-jar, a broken
wheel-barrow and other tools to show where the others had been digging.
The crew of the _Alerte_ were confident that they were at the right
place, and they set to work with the most admirable zeal and fortitude,
enduring hardships cheerfully, and during the three months of their
labors on Trinidad, removing earth and rock literally by the thousands
of tons, until the ravine was scooped out to a depth of from eight to
twenty feet.

Their vessel had to anchor far off shore, and once forsook them for a
fourteen hundred mile voyage to Bahia to get provisions.  These London
lawyers and other gentlemen unused to toil with the hands became as
tough and rough and disreputable to see as the pirates who had been
there aforetime.  In costume of shirt, trousers, and belt, they became
ragged and stained from head to foot with the soil, and presented a
uniform, dirty, brownish, yellow appearance like so many Brazilian
convicts.  Their surf boat was wrecked or upset at almost every attempt
to land or to go off to the _Alerte_, and when they were not fishing
one another out of the surf, they were diving to recover their
submerged and scattered stores.  Their leader, Mr. Knight, paid them a
tribute of which they must have been proud:

"They had toiled hard and had kept up their spirits all the while and
what is really wonderful under circumstances so calculated to try the
temper and wear out the patience, they had got on exceedingly well with
each other, and there had been no quarreling or ill feeling of any
sort."

At length the melancholy verdict was agreed upon in council.  All the
bright dreams of carrying home a fortune for every adventurer were
reluctantly dismissed.  The men were worn to the bone, and it was
becoming more and more difficult to maintain communication with the
_Alerte_.  The prodigious excavation was abandoned, and Mr. Knight
indulged himself in a soliloquy as he surveyed the "great trenches, the
piled-up mounds of earth, the uprooted rocks, with broken wheelbarrows
and blocks, worn-out tools, and other relics of our three months strewn
over the ground; and it was sad to think that all the energy of these
men had been spent in vain.  They well deserved to succeed, and all the
more so because they bore their disappointment with so much pluck and
cheerfulness."

But, in truth, the expedition had not been in vain.  The toilers had
been paid in richer stuff than gold.  They had lived the true romance,
nor could a man of spirit and imagination wish for anything more to his
taste than to be encamped on a desert island, with the surf shouting in
his ears, the sea birds crying, all hands up with daybreak to dig for
buried treasure whose bearings were found on a tarpaulin chart that had
belonged to a pirate with a deep scar across his cheek.  How it would
have delighted the heart of Robert Louis Stevenson to be one of this
company of the _Alerte_ at Trinidad!  The gallant little vessel, only
sixty-four feet long she was, filled away for the West Indies, homeward
bound, while the men aboard amused themselves by wondering how many
nations might have laid claim to the treasure, had it been
found;--England which hoisted its flag on Trinidad in 1770; Portugal
because Portuguese from Brazil made a settlement there in 1750; Brazil,
because the island lay off her coast; Spain, to whom the treasure had
belonged, and Peru from whose cathedral it was taken, and lastly the
Roman Church.

In conclusion, Mr. Knight, to whose fascinating narrative, "The Cruise
of the _Alerte_," I am indebted for the foregoing information, sums it
up like a true soldier of fortune:

"Well, indeed, it was for us that we had not found the pirates' gold;
for we seemed happy enough as we were, and if possessed of this hoard,
our lives would of a certainty have become a burden to us.  We should
be too precious to be comfortable.  We should degenerate into
miserable, fearsome hypochondriacs, careful of our means of transit,
dreadfully anxious about what we ate or drank, miserably cautious about
everything.  'Better far, no doubt,' exclaimed these cheerful
philosophers, 'to remain the careless, happy paupers that we are.'

"'Do you still believe in the existence of the treasure?' is a question
that has been often put to me since my return.  Knowing all I do, I
have very little doubt that the story of the Finn quartermaster is
substantially true,--that the treasures of Lima were hidden on
Trinidad; but whether they have been taken away, or whether they are
still there and we failed to find them because we were not in
possession of one link of the directions, I am unable to say."

In later years, E. F. Knight became a war correspondent, and lost an
arm in the Boer campaign.  I met him at Key West during the Spanish war
in which he represented _The London Times_ and found him to be a solid,
well-ballasted man who knew what he was about and not at all one to
have gone treasure seeking without excellent reasons.  That he was
adventurous in his unassuming way he proved by landing on the Cuban
coast near Havana in order to interview the Spanish Captain-General.  A
newspaper dispatch boat ran close in shore, the skipper risking being
blown out of water by the batteries of Morro Castle, and Knight was
transferred to a tiny flat-bottomed skiff of the tonnage of a bath-tub.
Equipped with a note-book, revolver, water bottle, and a small package
of sandwiches, he said good-by in his very placid manner, and was seen
to be standing on his head in the surf a few minutes later.  He
scrambled ashore, probably recalling to mind a similar style of landing
on the coast of Trinidad, and vanished in the jungle.  That he ran
grave danger of being potted for an _Americano_ by the first Spanish
patrol he encountered appeared to give him no concern whatever.  It was
easy to perceive that he must have been the right kind of man to lead a
treasure-hunting expedition.

Since the _Alerte_ sailed on her dashing quest in 1889, the pirates'
gold of Trinidad has figured in an adventure even more fantastic.  Many
readers will doubtless remember the career of the late Baron James
Harden-Hickey who attempted to establish a kingdom of his own on the
islet of Trinidad.  He belonged in another age than this and he was
laughed at rather more than he deserved.  Duelist, editor,
_boulevardier_, fond of the tinsel and trappings of life, he married
the daughter of John H. Flagler of the Standard Oil Company and with
funds from this excessively commercial source created a throne, a
court, and a kingdom.  He had seen the island of Trinidad from a
British merchant ship in which he went round the Horn in 1888, and the
fact that this was a derelict bit of real estate, to which no nation
thought it worth while to lay formal claim, appealed to his active
imagination.

A would-be king has difficulty in finding a stray kingdom nowadays, and
Harden-Hickey bothered his head not in the least over the problem of
populating this god-forsaken jumble of volcanic rock and ashes.  Ere
long he blossomed forth most gorgeously in Paris and New York as King
James I of the Principality of Trinidad.  There was a royal cabinet, a
Minister of Foreign Affairs, a Chancellerie, and uniforms, court
costumes, and regalia designed by the king himself.  Most dazzling of
all the equipment was the Order of the Insignia of the Cross of
Trinidad, a patent and decoration of nobility to be bestowed on those
deemed worthy of the signal honor.

The newspapers bombarded King James I with gibes and jeers, but he took
himself with immense, even tragic seriousness, and issued a prospectus
of the settlement of his kingdom, inviting an aristocracy of intellect
and good breeding to comprise the ruling class, while the hard work was
to be done by hired menials.  He mustered on paper some kind of a list
of resources of Trinidad, although he was hard put to name anything
very tangible, and laid special stress on the buried treasure.  It was
to be dug up by the subjects and, if found, to be divided among the
patriots who had bought the securities issued by the royal treasury.
Surely a pirates' treasure was never before gravely offered among the
assets of a kingdom, but King James had no sense of humor, and the lost
treasure was as real to him as any other of his marvelous dreams.

Some work was actually done at Trinidad, building material landed, a
vessel chartered to run from Brazil, and a few misguided colonists
recruited, when in 1895 the British Government ruthlessly knocked the
Principality of Trinidad into a cocked hat and toppled over the throne
of King James I.  The island was wanted as a cable landing or relay
station, and a naval officer raised the red ensign to proclaim
annexation by reason of Halley's discovery in 1700.  At this Brazil set
up a protest on the ground that her Portuguese had been the original
settlers.  While the diplomats of these two powers were politely
locking horns over the question of ownership, that unfortunate monarch,
King James I of the Principality of Trinidad, Baron Harden-Hickey of
the Holy Roman Empire, perceived that his realm had been pulled out
from under him, so to speak.  Whichever nation won the dispute it meant
no comfort for him.  Trinidad was no longer a derelict island and he
was a king without a kingdom.

He surrendered not one jot or tittle of his rights, and to his Minister
of Foreign Affairs he solemnly bequeathed the succession and the claim
to proprietorship.  And among these rights and privileges was the royal
interest in the buried treasure.  Harden-Hickey, when he could no
longer live a king, died as he thought befitting a gentleman, by his
own hand.  It seems a pity that he could not have been left alone to
play at being king, and to find the pirates' gold.




CHAPTER X

THE LURE OF COCOS ISLAND

It will be recalled that Lord Bellomont, in writing to his government
of the seizure of Kidd and his treasure, made mention of "a Pirate
committed who goes by the name of Captain Davis, that came passenger
with Kidd from Madagascar.  I suppose him to be that Captain Davis that
Dampier and Wafer speak of in their printed relations of Voyages, for
an extraordinary stout[1] man; but let him be as stout as he will, here
he is a prisoner, and shall be forthcoming upon the order I receive
from England concerning him."

If Bellomont was right in this surmise, then he had swept into his
drag-net one of the most famous and successful buccaneers of the
seventeenth century, a man who must have regarded the alleged misdeeds
of Kidd as much ado about nothing.  Very likely it was this same
Captain Edward Davis who may have been at the East Indies on some
lawful business of his own, but he had no cause for anxiety at being
captured by Bellomont as a suspicious character.  He had honorably
retired in 1688 from his trade of looting Spanish galleons and treasure
towns, in which year the king's pardon was offered all buccaneers who
would quit that way of life and claim the benefit of the proclamation.

It is known that he was afterwards in England, where he dwelt in
quietness and security.  William Dampier mentions him always with
peculiar respect.  "Though a buccaneer, he was a man of much sterling
worth, being an excellent commander, courageous, never rash, and endued
in a superior degree with prudence, moderation, and steadiness,
qualities in which the buccaneers generally have been most deficient.
His character is not stained with acts of cruelty; on the contrary,
wherever he commanded, he restrained the ferocity of his companions.
It is no small testimony to his abilities that the whole of the
buccaneers in the South Sea during his time, in every enterprise
wherein he bore part, voluntarily placed themselves under his guidance,
and paid him obedience as their leader; and no symptom occurs of their
having at any time wavered in this respect or shown inclination to set
up a rival authority.[2]

During the Kidd proceedings, the Crown officers made out no case
against Edward Davis, and he appears at the trial only as a witness in
Kidd's behalf.  He testified in corroboration of the fact that Kidd had
brought home the two French passes taken out of his captures, and his
experienced mind was quick to recognize the importance of the documents
as a sound defense against the charges of piracy.

Curiously enough, the name of Captain Edward Davis has since been
linked with a buried treasure story, that of Cocos Island in the
Pacific.  Certain it is that he and his comrades took great spoils
along the Spanish coasts of South America and the Isthmus, and that he
used Cocos Island as a convenient base for careening ship and
recuperating the health of his hard-fighting, careless crew.  Wafer has
given the following description of this popular resort for treasure
seekers of modern times:

"The middle of Cocos Island is a steep hill, surrounded with a plain
declining to the sea.  This plain is thick set with cocoanut trees; but
what contributes greatly to the pleasure of the place is that a great
many springs of clear and sweet water, rising to the top of the hill,
are there gathered as in a deep large basin or pond, and the water
having no channel, it overflows the verge of its basin in several
places, and runs trickling down in pleasant streams.  In some places of
its overflowing, the rocky side of the hill being more perpendicular
and hanging over the plain beneath, the water pours down in a cataract,
so as to leave a dry space under the spout, and form a kind of arch of
water.  The freshness which the falling water gives the air in this hot
climate makes this a delightful place.

"We did not spare the cocoa-nuts.  One day, some of our men being
minded to make themselves merry went ashore and cut down a great many
cocoa-nut trees, from which they gathered the fruit, and drew about
twenty gallons of the milk.  They then sat down and drank healths to
the King and Queen, and drank an excessive quantity; yet it did not end
in drunkenness; but this liquor so chilled and benumbed their nerves
that they could neither go nor stand.  Nor could they return on board
without the help of those who had not been partakers of the frolic, nor
did they recover under four or five days' time."[3]

Captain Edward Davis had found this delectable islet during a
singularly adventurous voyage.  The English buccaneers and the French
_filibustiers_ who had long cruised in the West Indies, were driven
from their haunts by the vigorous activity of the European governments,
and in 1683 an expedition was organized to go pirating against the
Spaniards in the Pacific, or the "South Sea."  Dampier was of this
number, also Captain John Cook, Captain Edward Davis, and Lionel Wafer
who wrote the journal of the voyage.  The scheme was hatched on the
coast of Hispaniola, and after taking two prizes, French vessels, to
Virginia to be sold, the company seventy strong, and most of them old
hands at this game, stood out from the Chesapeake in an eighteen-gun
ship called the _Revenge_.

Off the coast of Guinea they found a large Danish ship which better
suited their purpose, wherefore she was carried by boarding.  They
christened her the _Batchelor's Delight_, and abandoned their old
vessel which was burned, "that she might tell no tales."  In February
of 1684, they rounded Cape Horn and made for the island of Juan
Fernandez, which several of the company had previously visited with
Watling.  Then sailing northward, the ship visited the Galapagos
Islands to catch turtle, and bore away for Cocos which was missed
because of adverse winds and faulty navigation.  On this stretch of the
voyage, the _Batchelor's Delight_ passed what was known as the Isle of
Plate, or Drake's Island, in latitude 2 min. 42 sec. S., which has an
alluring lost treasure story of its own.  Says Esquemeling:

"This island received its name from Sir Francis Drake and his famous
actions, for here it is reported by tradition that he made the dividend
or sharing of that quantity of plate which he took in the Armada of
this sea, distributing it to each man of his company by whole bowls
full.  The Spaniards affirm to this day that he took at that time
twelve score tons of plate, and sixteen bowls of coined money a man,
his number being then forty-five men in all.  Insomuch that they were
forced to heave much of it overboard, because his ship could not carry
it all.  Hence was this island called by the Spaniards themselves the
Isle of Plate, from this great dividend, and by us Drake's Isle."[4]

The mainland of South America, or New Spain, was sighted near Cape
Blanco, where Captain John Cook died, and Edward Davis, then
quartermaster, was elected commander.  He cruised for some time along
the coast, learning among other interesting news that at Point Saint
Elena, "many years before a rich Spanish ship was driven ashore for
want of wind to work her, that immediately after she struck she heeled
off to seaward and sank in seven or eight fathoms of water, and that no
one ever attempted to fish for her because there falls in here a great
high sea."[5]

In the bay of Guayaquil, on the coast of Peru, Davis and Swan, who had
joined him in a small ship called the _Cygnet_, captured four vessels,
three of which had cargoes of negroes.  Most of them were let go, to
the great disappointment of Dampier who was filled with a mighty scheme
of treasure finding which he outlined in these words:

"Never was put into the hands of men a greater opportunity to enrich
themselves.  We had 1000 negroes, all lusty young men and women, and we
had 200 tons of flour stored up at the Galapagos Islands.  With these
negroes we might have gone and settled at Santa Maria on the Isthmus of
Darien, and have employed them in getting gold out of the mines there.
All the Indians living in that neighborhood were mortal enemies to the
Spaniards, were flushed by successes against them, and for several
years had been fast friends of the privateers.  Add to which, we should
have had the North Sea open to us, and in a short time should have
received assistance from all parts of the West Indies.  Many thousands
of buccaneers from Jamaica and the French islands would have flocked to
us; and we should have been an overmatch for all the force the
Spaniards could have brought out of Peru against us."

Soon after this, the little squadron blockaded the Bay of Panama for
several weeks, plundering whatever shipping came their way.  There they
were joined by two hundred Frenchmen and eighty Englishmen, old
buccaneers who had crossed the Isthmus of Darien to have a fling in the
South Seas.  Presently another party of two hundred and sixty-four sea
rovers under French command were added to the fleet, besides a strong
force of Englishmen led by one Townley.  Davis was made
commander-in-chief of this formidable combination of ten ships and nine
hundred and sixty men, of which the flagship was the _Batchelor's
Delight_.  They laid in wait for the annual treasure fleet sent by the
Viceroy of Peru to Panama and found it, but were beaten off because
Davis' confederates lacked his eagerness for fighting at close quarters.

Turning his attention to the mainland, Davis sacked and burned the city
of Leon on the lake of Nicaragua.  There one of the free-booters killed
"was a stout, grey-headed old man of the name of Swan, aged about
eighty-four years, who had served under Cromwell, and had ever since
made privateering or buccaneering his occupation.  This veteran would
not be dissuaded from going on the enterprise against Leon; but his
strength failed in the march, and after being left on the road he was
found by the Spaniards, who endeavored to make him their prisoner; but
he refused to surrender, and fired his musket amongst them, having in
reserve a pistol still charged; on which he was shot dead."[6]

After this, the force scattered in small bands to plunder on their own
account, Davis keeping together the best of the men whom he took to
Cocos Island where a considerable stay was made.  Thence he ravaged the
coast of Peru, capturing many vessels and taking many towns.  With
booty amounting to five thousand pieces of eight for every man, Davis
sailed to Juan Fernandez to refit, intending to proceed from there to
the West Indies, but before the ships and men were ready for the long
voyage around Cape Horn, many of the buccaneers had lost all their gold
at dice, and they could not endure to quit the South Sea empty handed.
Their luckier comrades sailed for the West Indies with Captain Knight,
while they chose to remain and try their fortune afresh with Captain
Davis, in the _Batchelor's Delight_.  They soon fell in with a large
party of French and English buccaneers who had formerly cruised with
them, and were now engaged in trying to take the rich city of
Guayaquil.  They were making sorry business of it, however, and in sore
need of such a capable leader as Davis.  He finished the task with
neatness and dispatch and shared in the gorgeous plunder of gold and
silver and jewels, reckoned by one of the Frenchmen in his account of
the episode at fifteen hundred thousand livres.

Davis was now satisfied to leave the Pacific, but whether he went first
to Cocos Island to bury any treasure, history saith not, although
tradition roundly affirms that he did.  That he and many of his fellow
buccaneers frequently resorted to the Galapagos group, as well as
tarrying at Cocos, is a matter of record.  Of the former islands,
Captain Colnet who touched there in 1793, wrote:[7]

"This isle appears to have been a favorite resort of the buccaneers as
we found seats made by them of stone and earth, and a considerable
number of broken jars scattered about, and some whole, in which the
Peruvian wine and liquors of the country are preserved.  We also found
daggers, nails and other implements.  The watering-place of the
buccaneers was at this time entirely dried up, and there was only found
a small rivulet between two hills, running into the sea, the
northernmost of which hills forms the south point of Fresh Water Bay.
There is plenty of wood, but that near the shore is not large enough
for other use than firewood."

The buccaneers of other voyages than these may have landed at Cocos
Island to leave their treasure.  Heaven knows they found plenty of it
in those waters.  There was Captain Bartholomew Sharp, for example,
with whom Dampier had sailed several years before.  He took a Guayaquil
ship called the _San Pedro_ off Panama, and aboard her found nearly
forty thousand pieces of eight, besides silver, silver bars and ingots
of gold, and a little later captured the tall galleon _Rosario_, the
richest prize ever boarded by the buccaneers.  She had many chests of
pieces of eight, and a quantity of wine and brandy.  Down in her hold,
bar upon bar, "were 700 pigs of plate," rough silver from the mines,
not yet made ready for the Lima mint.  The pirates thought this crude
silver was tin, and so left it where it lay, in the hold of the
_Rosario_, "which we turned away loose into the sea,"[8] with the
precious stuff aboard her.  One pig of the seven hundred was taken
aboard the _Trinity_ of Captain Sharp "to make bullets of."  About
two-thirds of it was "melted and squandered," but a fragment remained
when the ship touched at Antigua, homeward bound, and was given to a
"Bristol man" in exchange for a drink of rum.  He sold it in England
for seventy-five pounds sterling.

"Thus," says Basil Ringrose, "we parted with the richest booty we got
on the whole voyage."  Captain Bartholomew Sharp may have been thinking
of something else than the cargo of silver, for aboard the _Rosario_
was a woman, "the beautifullest Creature that his Eyes had ever
beheld," while Ringrose calls her "the most beautiful woman that I ever
saw in the South Seas."

Of these wild crews that flung away their lives and their treasure to
enrich romance and tradition, it has been said:

"They were of that old breed of rover whose port lay always a little
farther on; a little beyond the sky-line.  Their concern was not to
preserve life, but rather to squander it away; to fling it, like so
much oil, into the fire, for the pleasure of going up in a blaze.  If
they lived riotously, let it be urged in their favor that at least they
lived.  They lived their vision.  They were ready to die for what they
believed to be worth doing.  We think them terrible.  Life itself is
terrible.  But life was not terrible to them, for they were comrades;
and comrades and brothers-in-arms are stronger than life.  Those who
live at home at ease may condemn them.  The old buccaneers were happier
than they.  The buccaneers had comrades and the strength to lead their
own lives."[9]

This stout old breed had long since vanished when Cocos Island once
more became the theater of buried treasure legend.  The versions of
this latter story agree in the essential particular that it was Captain
Thompson of the merchant brig _Mary Dear_ who stole the twelve million
dollars' worth of plate, jewels, and gold coin which had been entrusted
to him by the Spanish residents of Lima in 1820, and buried them on
Cocos Island.  Then, after he had joined the crew of the pirate, Benito
Bonito, and somehow managed to escape alive when that enterprising
gentleman came to grief, he tried to return to Cocos Island to recover
the fabulous treasure.

The account of his later wanderings and adventures, as handed down in
its most trustworthy form, has been the inspiration of several modern
treasure-seeking expeditions.  It is related that a native of
Newfoundland, Keating by name, while sailing from England in 1844, met
a man of middle age, "handsome in appearance and having about him
something of an air of mystery which had an attraction of its own."
This was, of course, none other than Captain Thompson of the _Mary
Dear_.  He became friendly with Keating and when they landed at
Newfoundland, the latter asked him to accept the hospitality of his
home.  The stranger, who appeared anxious to avoid public notice,
remained for some time with Keating, and wishing to make some return
for his kindness, at length confided that he was one of the two
survivors of Benito Bonito's crew, and possessed a secret which would
make them immensely rich.  If Keating could persuade one of the
merchants of Newfoundland to fit out a vessel, they would sail to the
Pacific and fetch home enough treasure to buy the whole island.

Keating believed the strange tale and passed it on to a ship-owner who
agreed to furnish a vessel provided one Captain Bogue should go in
command of the expedition.  While preparations were under way, Thompson
was inconsiderate enough to die, but it goes without saying that he
left a map carefully marked with crosses and bearings.  Keating and
Bogue set sail with this precious document, and after a long and
tedious voyage into the Pacific, they cast anchor off Cocos Island.

======================================================================

[Illustration: Treasure-seekers digging on Cocos Island.]

Christian Cruse, the hermit treasure-seeker of Cocos Island.

======================================================================

There the brace of adventurers were rowed ashore, leaving the vessel in
charge of the mate.  Captain Thompson's directions were found to be
accurate, and a cave was discovered and in it a dazzling store of
treasure to make an honest sailor-man rub his eyes and stagger in his
tracks.  Keating and Bogue decided that the secret must be withheld
from the crew at all hazards, but their excitement betrayed them and
all hands clamored that they must be given shares of the booty.
Keating protested that a division should not be made until they had
returned to their home port and the owner of the ship had been given
the greater part which belonged to him by rights.

A mutiny flared up, and the mate and the men went ashore, leaving
Keating and Bogue marooned on board, but the search was bootless for
lack of directions.  They returned to the ship in a very savage temper
indeed and swore to kill the two leaders unless they should tell them
how to find the cave.  Promising to show the way on the morrow, Keating
and Bogue slipped ashore in a whale-boat that night, planning to take
all the treasure they could carry and hoping to find opportunity to
secrete it on shipboard.

This program was spoiled by a tragedy.  While trying to get back to the
ship through the heavy surf that roared on the beach, the boat was
upset.  Bogue, heavily ballasted with treasure, went to the bottom like
a plummet and was seen no more.  Keating clung to the water-logged boat
which was caught in a current and carried to sea.  Two days later he
was picked up, exhausted almost unto death, by a Spanish schooner which
put him ashore on the coast of Costa Rica.  Thence he made his way
overland to the Atlantic, and worked his passage home to Newfoundland
in a trading vessel.  His ship returned with never a doubloon among the
mutinous crew.

This experience seemed to have snuffed out the ardor of Keating for
treasure-seeking, and it was as much as twenty years later that he
confided the tale to a townsman named Nicholas Fitzgerald.  They talked
about fitting out another ship, but Keating up and died in the midst of
the scheming.  He had married a very young wife, and she set great
store by the chart and directions preserved as a heritage from Captain
Thompson.  In 1894 she struck a partnership with a Captain Hackett and
they organized an expedition which sailed for Cocos Island in a small
brig called the _Aurora_.  This adventure amounted to nothing.  There
was dissension on board, the voyage was longer than expected,
provisions fell short, and the _Aurora_ jogged homeward without
sighting the treasure island.

Meanwhile other explorers had been busy.  A German, Von Bremer, spent
several thousand dollars in excavating and tunneling, but found no
reward.  The tales of treasure also fired the brain of a remarkable
person named Gissler, who took up his solitary residence on Cocos
Island more than twenty years ago where he has since reigned with the
title and authority of governor of the same, by virtue of a commission
duly signed, sealed, and delivered by the republic of Costa Rica.  As a
persistent and industrious treasure-hunter, this tropical hermit is
unique.

He was visited in 1896 by Captain Shrapnel of H.M.S. _Haughty_ who had
heard the stories of Thompson and Benito Bonito along the coastwise
ports.  By way of giving his blue-jackets something to do, he landed a
party three hundred strong on Cocos Island whose landscape they vainly
blasted and otherwise disarranged for several days, but without
success.  The Admiralty lacked imagination and reprimanded Captain
Shrapnel for his enterprising break in the dull routine of duty.  It
was decreed that no more naval vessels were to touch at Cocos Island on
any pretext whatever.

This by no means discouraged Captain Shrapnel who waited until it was
permissible for him to apply for leave of absence.  In England he found
gentlemen adventurers sufficient to finance an expedition which sailed
in the _Lytton_ in 1903.  Of this party was Hervey de Montmorency,
whose account of the venture includes the following information:

"On the ninth of August, at four o'clock in the morning, every
treasure-seeker was on deck straining his eyes to penetrate the mist
and darkness; then as the sun rose, the gray mass on the horizon turned
to green, and Cocos Island, with its lofty wooded peak, its abrupt,
cliff-like shores, its innumerable cascades of sparkling water, was
displayed to eager and admiring eyes.

"The anchor was dropped in the little bay, and at the splash, flocks of
birds rose screaming and circling overhead.  The sandy beach on which
the seekers landed is strewn with boulders, on each of which is carved
the name and business of some vessel which has called at Cocos.  Some
of the dates carry one back to Nelson's time; and all sorts of ships
seem to have visited the lonely little island, while many a boulder
testified to blighted hopes and fruitless errands after treasure.

"Captain Shrapnel's party set to work with the highest expectation.  No
previous expedition had been so well furnished with clues.  Once on the
right track, it seemed impossible that they should fail.  They searched
for ten days, encouraged now by the finding of the broken arm of a
battered cross brought from some Peruvian church, again by a glimpse
into what promised falsely to be a treasure cave; but all blasting,
digging, and damming of streams proved useless.  Captain Shrapnel at
last called a council of war, and declared his opinion that the search
was hopeless; landslips, previous excavations, and the torrential rains
of this tropical region had so entirely altered the face of the island
that clues and directions were of little avail, nor did their agreement
with the owners of the _Lytton_ permit of a longer stay on Cocos.

"We did not leave the island, however, without paying a visit to its
governor, Gissler, whose little settlement is on Wafer Bay.  Rounding
the headland from Chatham Bay, we came into the quiet little nook where
he has made his home, and he at once waded out in the surf to greet the
visitors,--a tall, bronzed man, with a long, gray heard reaching below
his waist, and deep-set eyes which gazed with obvious suspicion.
Gissler had learned to distrust the coming of strangers, who have paid
small regard to his rights, pillaging his crops, killing his livestock,
and even making free with his home.

"Reassured by Captain Shrapnel's party that he had nothing to fear from
them, he invited them to his house and clearing, and told them of his
long and lonely hunt for the pirate's treasure.  When he first went to
live on Cocos, he found many traces of the freebooters.  There were
traces of their old camps, with thirty-two stone steps leading to a
cave, old fire-places, rusty pots and arms, and empty bottles to mark
the scene of their carousing.  He had found only one gold coin, a
doubloon of the time of Charles III of Spain, bearing the date of 1788."

In 1901, a company was formed in Vancouver, with a capital of $10,000,
to fit out an expedition for Cocos Island.  Gissler got wind of this
project and formally addressed the government of Costa Rica in these
written words:

"Allow me to inform you that no company with any such intent would have
the right to land on Cocos Island, as I hold a concession from the
authorities of Costa Rica in regard to the said treasure, in which
concession the Costa Rica government has an interest.  Certainly
anything that might be undertaken by such a company from Vancouver
would amount to naught without my consent."

This protest was paid due heed, but two years later, an Englishman,
Claude Robert Guiness, persuaded the officials of Costa Rica to listen
kindly to his plea, and he was granted the right to explore the island
for two years.  Gissler stood by his guns, drew up a list of
grievances, and sailed for the mainland in a small boat to assert his
rights to his kingdom.  At that time, a wealthy British naval officer,
Lord Fitzwilliam, was bound out to Cocos Island in his own steam yacht
with a costly equipment of machinery and a heavy crew to find the
treasure.  He found poor Gissler in a Costa Rican port, became
interested in his wrongs, and promptly supported his claims.  An
English nobleman with surplus wealth is a person to wield influence in
the councils of a Central American republic and Gissler was pacified
and given a renewal of his documentary rights as governor and
population of Cocos Island.

Lord Fitzwilliam took him on board the yacht and in this dignified
fashion Gissler returned to this kingdom.  He earned his passage by
telling his own version of the treasure, as he had culled and revised
it from various sources, and his bill of particulars was something to
gloat over, including as it did such dazzling bits of narrative as this:

"Besides the treasure buried by Captain Thompson, there was vast wealth
left on Cocos by Benito Bonito himself.  He captured a treasure galleon
off the coast of Peru and took two other vessels laden with riches sent
out from Mexico at the outbreak of the revolution against the
Spaniards.  On Cocos he buried three hundred thousand pounds' weight of
silver and silver dollars, in a sandstone cave in the side of the
mountain.  Then he laid kegs of powder on top of the cave and blew away
the face of the cliff.  In another excavation he placed gold bricks,
733 of them, four by three inches in size, and two inches thick, and
273 gold-hilted swords, inlaid with jewels.  On a bit of land in the
little river, he buried several iron kettles filled with gold coin."

Lord Fitzwilliam and his yacht arrived at Cocos in December of 1904,
and the party of laborers fell to with prodigious zest.  While they
were making the dirt fly, another English expedition, commanded by
Arnold Gray, hove in sight, and proceeded to begin excavating at
inconveniently close range.  In fact, both parties were cocksure that
the lost cave was located in one spot beneath a great mass of debris
that had tumbled down from the overhanging height.  The inevitable
result was that a pretty quarrel arose.  Neither force would yield its
ground.  Inasmuch as both were using dynamite rather lavishly, treasure
hunting became as dangerous as war.  When the rival expeditions were
not dodging the rocks that were sent hurtling by the blasting, they
were using bad language, the one accusing the other of effacing its
landmarks and playing hob with its clues.

The climax was a pitched battle in which heads were broken and
considerable blood spilt.  It is almost needless to observe that no
treasure was found.  Lord Fitzwilliam sailed home in his yacht and
found that the news of his escapade had aroused the displeasure of the
naval authorities, after which he lost all zest for finding buried
treasure.

Since then, hardly a year has passed but an expedition or two for Cocos
Island has been in the wind.  In 1906, a company organized in Seattle
issued an elaborate printed prospectus, offering shares in a venture to
sail in a retired pilot schooner, and recounting all the old tales of
Captain Thompson, Benito Bonito, and Keating.  At about the same time,
a wealthy woman of Boston, after a summer visit to Newfoundland, was
seized with enthusiasm for a romantic speculation and talked of finding
a ship and crew.  San Francisco has beheld more than one schooner slide
out through the Golden Gate in quest of Cocos Island.

To enumerate these ventures and describe them in detail would make a
tiresome catalogue of the names of vessels and adventurous men with the
treasure bee in their bonnets.  Charts and genuine information are no
longer necessary to one of these expeditions.  Cocos Island is under
such a spell as has set a multitude to digging for the treasure of
Captain Kidd.  The gold is there, this is taken for granted, and no
questions are asked.  The island was long a haunt of buccaneers and
pirates, this much is certain, and who ever heard of a true pirate of
romance who knew his business that did not employ his spare time in
"a-burying of his treasure?"



[1] Strong, or robust.

[2] _History of the Buccaneers of America_, by Captain James Burney
(1816).

[3] _Voyage and Description_, etc., by Lionel Wafer, London (1699).

[4] "The Buccaneers of America," by John Esquemeling (Published, 1684).

[5] Dampier.  To search for this wreck with a view to recover the
treasure in her was one of the objects of an expedition from England to
the South Sea a few years later than the voyage of Davis.

[6] "History of the Buccaneers of America," by Captain James Burney
(1816).

[7] Colnet's "Voyage to the Pacific."

[8] Esquemeling.

[9] "On the Spanish Main," by John Masefield.




CHAPTER XI

THE MYSTERY OF THE LUTINE FRIGATE

Harbored in the stately edifice of the Royal Exchange, down in the
heart of London City, is that ancient and powerful corporation known to
seafaring men the world over as Lloyd's.  Its chief business is the
underwriting of maritime insurance risks and its word is law wherever
fly the house-flags of merchant shipping.  More than two hundred years
ago, one Edward Lloyd kept a coffeehouse in Tower Street, a
thoroughfare between Wapping and the Thames side of the city, and
because of its convenient situation the place became a popular resort
for sea captains, underwriters, and insurance brokers who discussed
such important matters as arrivals in port, wrecks, missing ships, and
rumors of war.

In time Lloyd's coffeehouse was recognized as a sort of unofficial
headquarters for this special variety of insurance speculation, and the
gentlemen most active there drifted into a loosely formed organization
for the purpose of making the business less hazardous.  In 1773, this
association of underwriters moved into the Royal Exchange, taking the
name of Lloyd's, and later appointed a governing body or committee to
control the more adventurous spirits who were fond of gambling on the
chances of war, on the length of Napoleon's life, and who would
undertake to insure a man against the risk of twins in his family.
From this beginning grew the vastly influential and highly organized
Lloyd's of the present day which is something more than a corporation.
It is also an aggregation of individual underwriters and brokers
carrying on business, each for his own personal profit and on the
strength of his good name and resources.  As a corporation, Lloyd's has
no financial liability in the event of the failure of any of its
members or subscribers.

All that Lloyd's does, in its corporate capacity, is to permit the
admission only of men of stability and sound repute by means of
stringent tests, and to exact a money guarantee or deposit from its
members in the sum of L5000 or L6000, together with entrance fees of
L400, and annual fees of twenty guineas.  These payments form what may
be called a reserve fund, and the individual underwriter writes his own
policies.  If the risk is heavier than he wishes to assume he divides
it among his fellows.

There are few more interesting places in London than Lloyd's, encrusted
as it is with the barnacles of conservative tradition, and hedged about
with all the exclusiveness of a club.  The entrance is guarded by a
burly porter gorgeously arrayed in the scarlet robes and gold-banded
hat of a by-gone century.  Having run the gauntlet of this dragon, one
is likely to seek the underwriter's room where hundreds of members and
their clerks are quartered at rows of little desks or "boxes," every
man of them with his hat clapped on his head as decreed by ancient
custom.

There is always a crowd of them around the "Arrival Book" and the "Loss
Book" in which are posted the movements of vessels in every port of the
world, and the wrecks that number three thousand every year.  The
famous "Captains' Room" where the mariners used to gather and swap
briny yarns is now used for the prosaic purposes of luncheon and for
the auction sales of ships.

In the two large and handsome rooms used by the secretary and by the
committee of Lloyd's are many interesting relics of the earlier history
of this body.  Here is the oldest policy known to the annals of
maritime insurance, a faded document issued on January 20, 1680, for
L1200 on a ship, the _Golden Fleece_, and her cargo, on a voyage from
Lisbon to Venice, at L4 per cent. premium.  Hanging on these walls are
also a policy written on the life of Napoleon, and an autograph letter
from the Duke of Wellington as Warden of the Cinque Ports.

The most conspicuous furnishings of the Committee Room are a huge
table, highly polished, of dark wood, a magnificently carved arm chair,
and a ship's bell.  The table bears a silver plate inscribed as follows:


H.B.M. Ship _La Lutine_.

32 Gun Frigate

Commanded by Captain Lancelot Skynner, R.N.

Sailed from Yarmouth Roads

On the morning of the 9th October, 1799 with a large

amount of specie on board,

And was wrecked off the Island of Vlieland the same night,

When all on board were lost except one man.


The rudder of which this table was made and the rudder chain and the
bell which the table supports, were recovered from the wreck of the
ill-fated vessel, in the year 1859, together with a part of the specie,
which is now in custody of The Committee for managing the affairs of
Lloyd's."


The chair has a similar inscription, and these pieces of furniture
serve to remind the visitor that Lloyd's has a lost treasure story of
its own.  The flavor of piracy is lacking, true enough, but the tragedy
of the _Lutine_ frigate possessed mystery and romance nevertheless, and
is worthy of a place in such a book as this.  As the owner of a
treasure lost more than a century ago, the corporation of Lloyd's still
considers the frigate a possible asset, and as recently as May 31,
1910, Captain E. F. Inglefield, the Secretary of Lloyd's wrote the
author as follows:

"Various attempts have been made, with the sanction of Lloyd's, to
recover further treasure, but it was not until 1886, when steam suction
dredgers were first employed, that any results worthy of notice were
obtained.  A number of coins and other relics to the value of about
L700 were obtained.

"In 1886, also, two guns were recovered from the wreck, one of which,
after being suitably mounted on a naval gun carriage, was presented by
Lloyd's to the Corporation of London and has been placed in the Museum
at the Guildhall.  The other was graciously accepted by Her Late
Majesty Queen Victoria, and was forwarded to Windsor Castle.

"In 1891, a few coins of small value were recovered.  Since that date,
operations have been continued at various times by salvors under
agreement with Lloyd's, but nothing of intrinsic value has since been
obtained.  In 1896, a cannon which was afterwards presented to H. M.
Queen Wilhelmina of Holland by the Committee of Lloyds, was found
together with some small pieces of the wreck, etc.

"In 1898, some timber weighing about two hundred weight was recovered
from the wreck, and was presented to the Liverpool Underwriters'
Association, whose Chairman, Mr. S. Cross, had a chair made from the
wood, which he presented to that Association.

"A company which was formed for the purpose of continuing operations
has made efforts at various times, but the site is extremely exposed
and owing to bad weather, it has often been found impossible to
continue dredging operations for more than a few days each year.  I
trust the above information may be of service to you, but I may add
that I understand that it is this year intended to operate with some
new apparatus."

Some light was thrown on this latest enterprise by the publication of
the following in a recent issue of _Lloyd's Weekly Newspaper_ of London:


"SEA TREASURE GETTER.

NOVEL MACHINE TO BE USED FOR RAISING SUNKEN WEALTH.

"An extraordinary machine was towed to the mouth of the River Colne,
off Brightlingsea, and anchored on Thursday.  It is to be used in a
final attempt to recover L500,000 treasure of gold, in coins and bars,
which is said to have gone down in H. M. S. _Lutine_ in 1797 near the
island of Terschelling, off the coast of Holland.

"A portion of the treasure has been recovered, but the ordinary
dredging plant is now useless, as the vessel has sunk into the sand.
The new device is a great steel tube nearly 100 ft. in length, and wide
enough to allow a man to walk erect down its centre.  At one end is a
metal chamber provided with windows and doors, and at the other a
medley of giant hooks and other tackle.

"The apparatus has just been completed, after years of work, by
Messers. Forrest and Co., shipbuilders, in their Wyvenhoe yard.  One
end of the tube, it is explained, will be clamped to the side of a
steamship or barge.  The other end, by means of water-ballast tanks,
will be sunk until it touches the bottom.  Then, by means of compressed
air, all the water will be forced from the tube and also from the
chamber at the bottom of it, which will be flush upon the bed of the
sea.

"Divers will walk down a stairway in the centre of the tube until they
reach the submerged chamber.  Here they will don their diving costumes,
and, opening a series of water-tight doors, will step out into the
water.  Engineers will be stationed in the chamber, and, following the
instructions of the divers, who will communicate with them by means of
portable telephones, they will operate the mechanism of two powerful
suction pumps, or dredges, which are fitted to the sides of the tube.

"These dredges, it is hoped, will suck away the sand around the sides
of the heavy chamber until it gradually sinks by its own weight right
down on to the deck of the wrecked ship.  Then the divers, making their
way from the chamber to the deck of the ship, and thence to the hold,
will be able to transfer the treasure from the ship to the chamber by
easy stages."


How Lloyd's happens to own a treasure frigate of the English navy, lost
more than a century ago, is explained in the following narrative, many
of the facts of which were found in "The History of Lloyd's and of
Marine Insurance in Great Britain," by Frederick Martin, a work now out
of print.[1]

On October 19,1799, the _Gentleman's Magazine_ of London contained this
news:

"Intelligence was this day received at the Admiralty from Admiral
Mitchell, communicating the total loss of _La Lutine_, of 32 guns,
Captain Skynner, on the outward bank of the Fly Island Passage, on the
night of the 9th inst., in a heavy gale at N.N.W.  _La Lutine_, had on
the same morning, sailed from Yarmouth Roads with several passengers,
and an immense quantity of treasure for the Texel; but a strong
lee-tide rendered every effort of Captain Skynner to avoid the
threatened danger unavailable, and it was alike impossible during the
night to receive any assistance, either from the _Arrow_, Captain
Portlock, which was in company, or from the shore, from whence several
showts were in readiness to go to her.  When the dawn broke, _La
Lutine_ was in vain looked for; she had gone to pieces, and all on
board unfortunately perished, except two men who were picked up, and
one of whom has since died from the fatigue he has encountered.  The
survivor is Mr. Shabrack, a notary public.  In the annals of our naval
history there has scarcely ever happened a loss attended with so much
calamity, both of a public as well as a private nature."

In almost all the accounts of the wreck of the _Lutine_ it is stated as
a fact that the frigate was bound to the Texel, and that the bullion
and treasure she carried, and which was lost in her, was designed for
the payment of the British forces in the Netherlands.  Both statements
are without foundation, as proved by a careful search in the archives
of the Admiralty.  These official records show that the _Lutine_ was
under orders to sail, not to the Texel, but to the river Elbe, her
destination being Hamburg, and that the treasure on board was not the
property of the British government, but of a number of London merchants
connected with Lloyd's, and that the business of sending the coin and
bullion was purely commercial.

The records wholly fail to explain how it happened that, sailing for
the mouth of the Elbe, the _Lutine_ commanded by an able and
experienced officer, and in all respects well manned and found, came to
be driven, within eighteen hours after leaving Yarmouth Roads, upon the
dangerous shoals of the Zuyder Zee, far out of her course, even when
every allowance is made for the strength of a northwesterly gale.

Another mystery of the voyage of this thirty-two gun frigate of the
royal navy is her employment as a mere packet, carrying cash and
bullion for the benefit of private individuals.  The officer
responsible for sending the _Lutine_ on this unusual errand was Admiral
Lord Duncan who "received a pressing invitation from some merchants to
convey a quantity of bullion."  It was his first intention to dispatch
a cutter, but the treasure given in his care was swelled by larger
amounts until its total value was L1,175,000 or more than five and a
half million dollars.  The admiral thereupon discarded the cutter and
selected instead the swift and staunch _Lutine_ frigate, one of the
best vessels of his fleet.  On October 9, he wrote to the Admiralty
from on board his flagship, the _Kent_, in Yarmouth Roads:

"The merchants interested in making remittances to the continent for
the support of their credit, having made application to me for a King's
ship to carry over a considerable sum of money, on account of there
being no Packet for that purpose, I have complied with their request,
and ordered the _Lutine_ to Cuxhaven with the same, together with the
mails lying there for want of conveyance; directing Captain Skynner to
proceed to Stromness immediately after doing so, to take under his
protection the Hudson's Bay's ships and see them in safety to the
Nore."  When this letter was written, the _Lutine_ had already sailed,
and before Lord Duncan's communication reached the Lords of the
Admiralty, the splendid treasure laden frigate had laid her bones on
the sand banks of Holland.

Admiral Duncan appears to have escaped all censure for this disaster
which followed his action taken without consultation and without
waiting for the approval of his superiors.  The merchants of London
were powerful enough to command the services of the navy, and English
credit was needed on the continent to buttress English arms and
statesmanship.  With her millions of treasure and hundreds of lives,
the _Lutine_ drove straight toward as fatal a coast to shipping as can
be found anywhere in the world.

It is a coast which is neither sea nor land, strewn with wrecks, and
with somber memories even more tragic.  Where is now the entrance of
the Zuyder Zee was unbroken terra firma until the thirteenth century
when a terrible hurricane piled the North Sea through the isthmus
separating it from the large lake called Vlies by the natives.  A wide
channel was cut by this inroad, and in 1287 the North Sea scoured for
itself a second inlet at the cost of a hundred thousand human lives.
Ever since then, the channels have been multiplying and shifting until
what was once the coast line has become a maze of islands and
sand-banks, the Texel, Vlieland, Terschelling, Ameland, and hundreds of
lesser ones which confuse even the mariners born and bred among them.

With a wind which should have enabled him to give this perilous shore a
wide berth and to keep to his course up the North Sea, Captain Skynner
plunged into a death-trap from which there was no escape.  The sole
survivor could give no coherent account, and he died while on the way
to England before his shattered nerves had mended.  There was no more
frigate, and as for the hundreds of drowned sailors, they had been
obliterated as a day's work in the business of a great navy, so the
Admiralty left the mourning to their kinfolk and bestirred itself about
that five and a half million dollars' worth of treasure which the sea
could not harm.  Vice-Admiral Mitchell was informed by letter that
"their lordships feel great concern at this very unfortunate accident"
and he was directed to take such measures as might be practicable for
recovering the stores of the _Lutine_, as well as the property on
board, "being for the benefit of the persons to whom it belongs."

The underwriters of Lloyd's with an eye to salvage, were even more
prompt than the Admiralty in sending agents to the scene of the wreck.
The greater part of the immense amount of coin and bullion had been
fully insured, a transaction which indicates the stability and ample
resources of this association as far away in time as 1799.  The loss
was paid in full and with such promptitude that only two weeks after
the disaster, the Committee for managing the concerns of Lloyd's
addressed a letter to the Secretary of the Admiralty in which was
requested "the favor of Mr. Nepean to lay before the Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty the information that a sum of money,
equal to that unfortunately lost in the _Lutine_, is going off this
night for Hambro, and they trust their Lordships will direct such steps
as they think expedient for its protection to be taken."

The request was granted somewhat grudgingly.  Apparently the Admiralty
regretted the employment of one of its frigates as a merchantman.
Admiral Lord Duncan was directed to send a convoy this time, but was
told also "to let them know that their lordships have done so in this
particular case; but that they must not expect the packets can again be
convoyed."  With this letter ends all reference to the _Lutine_ and her
treasure in the correspondence preserved in the Record Office of the
Admiralty.

Having paid their losses, like the good sportsmen that they were, the
underwriters of Lloyd's thereby clinched their right to the ownership
of the treasure, provided they could find it.  The situation was
complicated because England was at that time at war with the
Netherlands whose government claimed the wreck as a prize, although
inconsistently refusing to let it be adjudicated by a prize court.  On
this account, Lloyd's could make no attempt to fish for the treasure,
which delay was very much to the benefit of the sturdy Dutch fishermen
of the islands at the mouth of the Zuyder Zee.  The sands and the surf
held a golden harvest.  The wreck of the _Lutine_ was partly exposed at
low ebb tide, and a channel ran close to the side of the ship.

The clumsy fishing boats or "showts" swarmed to the place and never was
there such easy wealth for honest Dutchmen.  Their government soon put
a watch on them and took two-thirds of the findings, giving the
fishermen the remainder.  They toiled in good weather for a year and a
half, and recovered treasure to the amount of eighty-three thousand
pounds sterling.  The official inventory reads like the hoard of a
buccaneer, including as it does such romantic items as:

  58 bars of gold, weight 646 lbs. 23 ounces.
  35 bars of silver, weight, 1,758 lbs. 8 ounces.
  41,697 Spanish silver pistoles.
  179 Spanish gold pistoles.
  81 Double Louis d'or.
  138 Single Louis d'or.
  4 English guineas.


At the end of the year 1801 the fishermen quit their task, thinking
they had found all the treasure.  For a dozen years the Dutch forgot
the melancholy fragments of the _Lutine_, while the sailors of the
desolate islands guarding the Zuyder Zee began to weave superstitious
legends around the "gold wreck."  In the midst of the crowded events of
the great war against Napoleon, England found no time to remember the
_Lutine_, and her memory was kept alive only by the kinfolk of the
drowned officers and sailors.

After Napoleon had been finally disposed of, the treasure was recalled
to public notice by an ingenious gentleman of the Netherlands, Pierre
Eschauzier, a sort of lord of the manor under the government, holding
the post of "Opper Strand vonder," or "Upper Strand finder," who lived
at Terschelling and took a lively interest in the wreck.  After a great
deal of investigation and cogitation, he arrived at the conclusion that
the greater part of the treasure dispatched from England in the
_Lutine_ was still hidden among her timbers.  His argument was based on
the fact that the bars of silver and gold already recovered were
stamped with certain numbers and letters indicating series or
sequences, and that thus far these were very incomplete.

For instance, among the gold bars previously found, were thirteen
marked with the letters _NB_, in three separate lots; the first
numbered from 58 to 64; the second from 86 to 90; and the third from 87
to 89.  Other gold bars with different letters and a variety of numbers
went to prove that there were a hundred numbers to each letter, which
would yield a total of six hundred gold bars, of which only thirty-one
had been recovered in the years 1800 and 1801.

The government of the Netherlands was duly impressed by the
calculations of Mr. Eschauzier who had proved himself such an astute
"Upper Strand finder," and he was granted a sum by royal decree from
the public exchequer to equip a salvage expedition.  Alas, the pretty
theory was thwarted by the implacable sands which had buried the wreck.
For seven years this indefatigable treasure seeker dredged and dug, and
found no more than a few gold coin.  Then he decided to try a diving
bell, King Willem I having bestowed upon him a more favorable privilege
by the terms of which the salvage company was to have one-half of the
treasure recovered.

The diving bell was no luckier than the dredges had been.  In fact, by
this time the unstable sands had so concealed the wreck that it could
not be found.  After vainly groping for several months, the luckless
"Upper Strand finder" confessed himself beaten, and there was nothing
to show for an expenditure of five thousand pounds sterling.  These
operations had made some noise in London, however, and the underwriters
of Lloyd's remembered that they had an interest in the wreck of the
_Lutine_ frigate.  If there was still treasure to be sought for, it
belonged to them, and the government of the Netherlands had no claim
upon it, either in law or equity.

The fact that royal decrees had been granting to Dutchmen that which
did not belong to them at all, aroused indignation at Lloyd's, whose
managing committee was moved to address the English government in the
matter.  After a good deal of diplomatic palaver with The Hague, that
government made over its half share of the treasure reserved under the
treaty with "the Upper Strand finder" to the "British claimants."  In
May 6, 1823, Mr. F. Conyngham, Secretary of the English Foreign Office,
communicated this pleasing news to Mr. William Bell, chairman of the
committee of Lloyd's in the following letter:


"_Sir_:

"With reference to the several applications which have been made to His
Majesty's Government to interfere with that of the Netherlands on
behalf of the underwriters, and others, claiming to be allowed to
recover certain property still supposed to remain on board of the
_Lutine_ Frigate, lost off the coast of Holland in 1799, I am directed
by Mr. Secretary Canning to acquaint you, for the information of the
parties concerned, that after much negotiation His Netherlands' Majesty
has expressed his willingness to cede to the British claimants the
whole of that moiety of the said property which by His Netherlands'
Majesty's decree of the 14th. September, 1821, was reserved for the use
of his said Majesty.  The other moiety was, by the same decree, granted
in the nature of salvage to a private company of his own subjects, who
undertook to recover the cargo at their own expense.  It has been
stipulated that the British claimants shall be at liberty to concert
with the said company as to the best mode of effecting that recovery.
Considering the difficulties which the negotiation has experienced from
disputed points of law, and making due allowance for the engagements
formed with the Dutch company, who have been recognized as salvors by
the Dutch law, and would have a right to have all services rewarded in
the Courts of Holland for the property which may be saved by their
exertions, Mr. Canning apprehends that it may be advisable for the
claimants in this country to agree to the offer now made.  The season
for operation is now before them, and no hope could be reasonably
entertained that a renewal of the negotiation would bring the matter to
a more reasonable close."


It will be observed that diplomacy had obtained for Lloyd's only a
half-interest in its own wreck.  The other fifty per cent. still
belonged to Mr. Eschauzier's company, as King Willem was particular to
make clear in his decree, dated from Het Loo, which went on to say: "By
our Minister of Foreign Affairs, we have offered to the King of Great
Britain to cede to his Majesty all that which by our decree of the 14th
of September, 1821, was reserved to the Netherlands in the bottom in
question and the cargo therein, doing so solely as a proof of our
friendly feeling towards the Kingdom of Great Britain, and in nowise
from a conviction of the right of England to any portion of the said
cargo....

"We have been pleased and thought fit:

"1.  To cede to His Majesty of Great Britain all that which by our
decree of the 4th September, 1821, was reserved in favor of the kingdom
relative to the cargo of the frigate _Lutine_.

"2.  To instruct our minister of inland affairs and the maritime
department--Water Staat--to give notice of this our decree, as well as
of the cession made on the part of His Majesty of Great Britain to the
Society of Lloyd's, to our chancellor of state, governor of North
Holland, and to the other authorities concerned, as well as to the
participators in the undertaking of 1821 in the Netherlands, and to
inform them likewise that an English agent will ere long wait upon
them, in order to make all such arrangements with them as may be deemed
advisable for the furtherance of their mutual interests.  And our
Ministers for Inland Affairs and the Maritime Department are charged
with the carrying out of this decree."

The members of Lloyd's were hardly better off with the gift of one-half
a wreck than they had been with no wreck at all.  Before undertaking
any salvage operations they must come to some kind of an understanding
with the "Upper Strand Finder" and his partners, with respect to
expenses and profits.  The Dutch, with proverbial caution, were
reluctant to scrape acquaintance with the English owners, convinced
that in some matter or other, this new ownership in the treasure had
been unfairly extorted from their government at the Hague.  It was not
until 1830, that friendly relations were established, and in the
meantime Mr. Eschauzier had died, leaving his share in the treasure
among his legacies.

Then negotiations were interrupted by the political events which caused
the separation of Belgium from Holland.  The people of the Netherlands
heartily hated England for her leading part in this partition, and not
even the allurement of fishing gold out of the sea could persuade the
Dutch adventurers to have anything to do with Lloyd's or anything that
smacked of the perfidious English.  For a quarter of a century, the
wreck of the _Lutine_ was undisturbed.  Then, in 1846, two enterprising
English divers in need of work, Hill and Downs by name, conceived an
audacious scheme to enrich themselves.  They drew up a petition to the
King of the Netherlands, asking that they be permitted to pick up as
much gold as they could lay hands on among the timbers of the _Lutine_.
Surprising as was this request, it was not refused.  According to
custom, the petition was carefully examined at The Hague, and the
discovery was gravely announced that there was no legal obstacle in the
way of the divers, or anyone else, who cared to seek for the _Lutine's_
treasure.

One of the articles of a new code of maritime law, passed by the States
General of the Netherlands in 1838, provided that the salvage of
vessels wrecked "on the outer banks of the coast," was thrown open to
all persons, under stipulated conditions, and that the wreck of the
_Lutine_ came within this act.  The government formally notified Hill
and Downs that while the right of salvage could not be granted to any
particular person, the ground was free on condition that "one-half of
all that might be found must be given up to Lloyd's."

The divers may have found some other employment by this time, for they
appeared not at the wreck, but the publication of the proceedings awoke
the old Dutch company formed by the "Upper Strand Finder" and they
opened negotiations with the committee of Lloyd's.  No one concerned
seemed to be in a hurry to find the several million dollars remaining
in the _Lutine_ and nine more years dragged past before a working
agreement was signed between the two parties.  The Dutch company
undertook to carry on the work of salvage, paying over one-half the
gross proceeds to Lloyd's.

It was in 1857 that the Dutch went to work, and after a month of
exploration the Secretary of Lloyd's received this pleasing information
from his agent at the Texel:

"I feel most happy to inform you that the new efforts to save the value
out of the _Lutine_ have not been without success.  Yesterday there was
recovered by means of divers and pincers, 13 silver coins, being
Spanish piastres, 1 gold Louis d'or, 5 brass hoops and casks, and a
quantity of cannon and shot.

"Considering the value of the saved objects, it may not be of much
signification; but the salvage itself is of very great importance, as
it proves two facts, namely, first, that the wreck of the _Lutine_ has
really been found, and secondly, that there is specie still in the
wreck.  As soon as anything more is picked up, I will inform you
immediately thereof.  Be assured, I have taken the necessary steps to
secure the interests of Lloyd's committee, as owners of the treasure,
which we hope may entirely be saved."

A little later, the wreck was found to be very little scattered and its
precise location was determined.  The news of the discovered "gold
wreck" spread among the fishermen of the Zuyder Zee and the German
Ocean and they winged it to the scene until "there were sixty-eight
large and well manned boats in the immediate neighborhood looking for
plunder."  At this threatening mobilization, the Dutch government
thought it wise to send a gunboat with a party of soldiers on board.

In the summer of 1858, the divers brought to the surface the bell of
the frigate, which now rests in the committee room of Lloyd's with the
other relics.  The _Lutine_ had been one of the crack ships of the
French navy and was captured by Admiral Duncan, he who sent her to her
doom.  The bell bears on its bronze side the royal crown and arms of
Bourbon, and on the rim the name of "Saint Jean" under whose protection
the ship and her crew had been placed when she was launched as a
fighting frigate of His Majesty, Louis XVI of France.

The treasure seeking was continued for several years, whenever the
treacherous sea permitted, until, at length, a great gale out of the
northwest closed the channel near the wreck and covered her deeper
under the sands.  The work was finally abandoned by these salvors in
1861.  They had forwarded to England for the benefit of Lloyd's a total
amount of L22,162, to show that the undertaking had been worth while.
In the Act of Incorporation of Lloyd's granted by Parliament in 1871,
the treasure recovered, as well as that still left in the wreck, was
carefully referred to, and it was stated that "the Society may from
time to time do, or join in doing all such lawful things as they think
expedient, with a view to further salving from the wreck of the
_Lutine_."

It seems rather extraordinary that the exact amount of the treasure
lost in the frigate should be a matter of conjecture, and that the
records of Lloyd's throw no light on this point.  The explanation is
that only part of the precious cargo was insured by the underwriters
then doing business in the Royal Exchange building, and that a large
amount of gold coin and bullion was hastily forwarded to the _Lutine_
by divers bankers and merchants shortly before sailing.  The records of
these consignments were, of course, scattered and have long since been
lost.

The total amount lost has been quite accurately calculated by employing
the system of accounting devised by the "Upper Strand Finder."  His
theory was verified by later undertakings at the wreck, and the
sequences of letters and numbers stamped upon the gold and silver bars
were found to run in regular order, so that it has been latterly
assumed that, in all, one thousand of these were in the ship's hold.
The figures accepted by the Dutch partners in the enterprise, and
endorsed by Mr. John Mavor Hill, the agent of Lloyd's at Amsterdam,
were as follows:

  Salvage in the years 1800 and 1801 .............. L   55,770
     "    "   "    "   1857 and 1858 ..............     39,203
     "    "   "    "   1859 to  1861 ..............      4,920
                                                    ----------
         Total salvage ............................ L   99,893

  Total treasure estimated to have been lost ...... L1,175,000
                                                    ----------
  Treasure remaining in the wreck ................. L1,076,107


It is plausible to assume, therefore, that more than five million
dollars in gold and silver are still buried in the sands of the island
beach at the entrance of the Zuyder Zee, and that at any time strong
gales and shifting currents may once more uncover the bones of the
ill-fated _Lutine_ frigate.  The members of Lloyd's are daily reminded,
by the presence of the massive oaken table and chair and the silent
ship's bell in the Committee Room, of the princely fortune that is
theirs, if they can find it.  The story is a romance of maritime
insurance, and the end has not yet been written, for with modern
equipment and ingenuity those gold and silver bars, Spanish pistoles,
and Louis d'or may some day be carried up the staircase of Lloyd's to
enrich a corporation of the twentieth century.



[1] "The particulars concerning the _Lutine_ which you have obtained
from Martin's 'History of Lloyd's,' can, I think, be considered as
accurate, as I believe Mr. Martin had full means of access to any
documents which were available at Lloyd's or elsewhere in connection
with this matter."  (Note from Captain Inglefield, Secretary of
Lloyd's, to the author.)




CHAPTER XII

THE TOILERS OF THE THETIS

The _Lutine_ was not the only treasure-laden frigate lost by the
British navy.  The circumstances of the wreck of the _Thetis_ in 1830
are notable, not so much for the gold and silver that went down in her,
as for the heroic courage and bulldog persistence of the men who toiled
to recover the treasure.  Their battle against odds was an epic in the
annals of salvage.  They were treasure-seekers whose deeds, forgotten
by this generation, and grudgingly rewarded by their own, were highly
worthy of the best traditions of their flag and their race.

On the morning of December 4th of the year mentioned, the forty-six gun
frigate _Thetis_, with a complement of three hundred men, sailed from
Rio Janeiro, homeward bound.  As a favor to various merchants of the
South American coast who were fearful of the pirates that still lurked
in the West Indies, her captain had taken on board for consignment to
London, a total amount of $810,000 in gold and silver bars.  During the
evening of the second night at sea, the ship was running at ten and a
half knots, with studding-sails set, and plenty of offing, by the
reckoning of the deck officers.  The lookout stationed on the cat-head
had no more than bellowed "Breakers under the bow!" when his comrade
echoed it with, "Rocks above the mast-head."

An instant later, the soaring bowsprit of the frigate splintered with a
tremendous crash against the sheer cliffs of Cape Frio.  The charging
vessel fetched up all standing.  Her hull had not touched bottom and
there was nothing to check her enormous momentum.  In a twinkling,
literally in the space of a few seconds, her three masts were ripped
out and fell on deck with all their hamper, killing and wounding many
of the crew.  Instead of that most beautiful sight in all the world, a
ship under full sail and running free, there was a helpless hulk
pounding out her life against the perpendicular wall of rock.  The
catastrophe befell so suddenly that when Captain Burgess rushed from
his cabin at the warning shout, the masts tumbled just as he reached
the quarterdeck.

"No description can realize the awful state of the ill-fated ship and
all on board at this appalling moment; the night was rainy and so dark
that it was impossible to ascertain their position, beyond the fact of
their being repeatedly driven with tremendous force against cliffs of a
stupendous height above them, and consequently inaccessible, and not
offering the slightest chance of escape; the upper deck of the ship,
the only part in which exertion could be useful, was completely choked
up with masts, sails, and rigging, which presented obstacles that
rendered unavailing every attempt at active exertion; while the ears of
all, who were of course using their utmost endeavors for the general
safety, were pierced by the cries of the dying and wounded for the
assistance which the imperious calls of duty forbade them to give.
Nothing but inevitable destruction presented itself to all on board;
and their perfectly helpless state rendered all deliberation useless;
and indeed there was no choice of measures, no point on which to offer
an opinion, and they could only await such means as Providence might
present."[1]

As by a miracle, the bowsprit and yard-arms had so checked the speed of
the frigate, acting as a sort of buffer, that her hull was not smashed
like an eggshell but was found to be fairly tight.  All of the boats
had been smashed by the falling spars, and the wretched company could
only hang fast and pray that the wreck might float until daylight.  But
the hammering seas soon caused her to leak through yawning seams, and
despairing of keeping her from sinking, a few of the crew managed to
reach a shelving projection of rock about twenty feet above the deck.
It was a forlorn hope, so perilous to attempt that many of those who
scrambled for a foothold fell between the ship and the cliff and were
drowned or crushed to death.

Presently the hulk swung away from the face of the cliff and was driven
a distance of a third of a mile along the coast and into a tiny cove or
notch in the bold headlands of Cape Frio.  Here she remained, now
sinking very fast.  The party who had succeeded in making a landing on
the ledge clawed their way to the rescue, following the drifting ship,
and with the hardihood and agility of British tars of the old breed,
they made their way down the declivity like so many cats and succeeded
in making fast to a rope thrown by their comrades on board.  By this
means, several men had been hauled to safety when the dying frigate
lurched wildly and parted the hawser.

It was discovered that she now rested on the bottom.  Part of the port
bulwark, the hammock-nettings, the taffrail, and the stumps of the
masts remained above water, and to these the crew clung while the surf
roared over their heads and threatened to tear them away.  The
situation was now hopeless, indeed, but all left alive on board were
saved by the daring and strength of one man, Boatswain Geach.  He
fought his way through the breakers to the stump of the bowsprit,
lashed himself there, and succeeded in passing a line to his comrades
on shore.  A strong rope was then hauled up and one by one the men on
board were slung to safety upon the cliffs.  Almost all the survivors
were dreadfully bruised and lacerated.

When the news reached Rio Janeiro, the British sloop-of-war _Lightning_
was in that port, and her commander, Captain Thomas Dickinson, was the
sort of man who likes nothing better than to lead a forlorn hope and
grapple with difficulties.  Said he:

"The consternation occasioned by the dreadful catastrophe was not
confined to naval persons, but was universally felt at Rio,
particularly among mercantile people, since from the tenor of the
letter, and the description given by the officer who brought it, the
ship and everything she contained were considered as totally lost.  The
event became a matter of general conversation; but while everyone
deplored it, I did not hear of any who seemed disposed to venture on an
attempt to recover the property, all appearing to consider the case as
perfectly hopeless....  Here was an undertaking which, if successful,
would assuredly lead to professional reputation and fortune, but which
everyone whom I addressed on the subject thought must fail.  Still, the
scarcity of the opportunities of obtaining distinction and credit, by
an extraordinary act of duty, which present themselves to officers in
these piping times of peace, offered a consideration which prevailed,
and I determined on making the attempt, if I could get orders from the
Commander-in-Chief to that effect."

The admiral of the station proceeded to Cape Frio with a squadron of
five vessels, and after a careful study of the situation of the wreck
concluded that it would be futile to try to recover any of the sunken
treasure.  In the face of this verdict, Captain Dickinson felt
reluctant to press his own views, but the bee in his bonnet would not
be denied.  "Actuated, however, by the same feelings which had at first
prompted me to hazard the attempt, and having a natural repugnance to
receding after having, during my inquiries, disclosed my views very
freely, I was resolved to persevere.  During the absence of the
Commander-in-Chief, I constantly employed myself in inquiring for any
persons likely to assist me, searching for implements, and obtaining
all the information within my reach, and devised several instruments of
minor importance which appeared likely to be useful.  On his return
from Cape Frio, I showed these to him, of the whole of which he
approved."

Captain Dickinson could find no diving bell in Rio, so this versatile
officer proceeded to make one, and an extraordinary contrivance it was
for men to risk their lives in at the bottom of the sea.  From H.M.S.
_Warspite_, one of the squadron in harbor, he obtained two iron water
tanks.  These were turned over to an English mechanic named Moore,
formerly employed by the Brazilian government, who was assisted by the
carpenter of the _Lightning_.  Between them they fashioned the water
tanks into something that looked like a diving bell.  These capable
artisans then built an air pump, and now they were shy of hose through
which to force air to the submerged toilers.

"Being unable to find a workman in Rio Janeiro who would undertake to
make an air-tight hose," explains Captain Dickinson, "there appeared
for a time to be a stop to my preparations; but recollecting that there
was a Truscott's pump on board the _Lightning_, I attempted to render
the hoses belonging to it fit for the purpose, and to my great delight
succeeded, by first beating them hard with a broad-faced hammer to
render the texture as close as possible, then giving them a good coat
of Stockholm tar, afterwards parceling them well with new canvas
saturated with the same material, and finally serving them with
three-yarn spun-yarns, made of new yarns and well twisted.

"Having thus surmounted without assistance the two most formidable
difficulties that had yet presented themselves, I entertained a hope
that my own resources would prove equally available on future
occasions; and hence my confidence in ultimate success increased, in
the event of the stores and treasure still remaining where the ship was
lost.  My officers and crew likewise now began to feel a great interest
in all that was doing; and their conduct and expressions afforded me a
happy presage that their future exertions would fulfill my most
sanguine expectations....  I could not but feel that the same
encouragement was not afforded by some from whom I had most reason to
expect both it and assistance; for although I had now been for six
weeks engaged in work, drudging on in the double capacity of carpenter
and blacksmith, I had not a single voluntary offer by them of any
article that might be useful to me.  Nor was the kindness of my friends
very encouraging; for they almost universally endeavored to dissuade me
from venturing on an enterprise which everyone considered hopeless; to
all of which remonstrances my only reply was, that my mind was made up,
and that I should not withdraw from it."

The _Lightning_ sailed to begin operations at Cape Frio on the 24th of
January, 1831, with a Brazilian launch in tow, "and _La Seine_, French
frigate, in company, going to visit the place as a matter of
curiosity."  At the scene of the wreck were found the sloop of war
_Algerine_, a schooner as tender, and a complement from the _Warspite_,
which were engaged in saving such stores and spars as had drifted
ashore.  The theater of Captain Dickinson's ambition as a
treasure-seeker was hostile and forbidding, a coast on which it seemed
impossible to tarry except in the most favorable weather.  As he
describes it, "the island of Cape Frio is about three miles long and
one in breadth, is the southeastern extremity of Brazil, and separated
from the mainland by a narrow strait or gut about four hundred feet
broad, having very deep water in it, and through which, the land on
each side being very high, the wind constantly rushes in heavy gusts,
and a rapid current runs.  This island is entirely mountainous, and
nearly covered with an almost impenetrable forest, and the whole coast
on the sea side of it is formed by precipitous cliffs, washed by very
deep water close to the shore; and on the harbor side, with the
exception of a sandy bay, is very steep and rugged."

The little notch in the seaward cliffs, into which the frigate had been
driven, was named Thetis Cove by Captain Dickinson who explored it
vainly for traces of the wrecked hull.  Either she had been washed out
into deep water, or had entirely broken up.  Two months had passed
since the disaster, and the only way of trying to find the remains of
the vessel was by means of sounding with a hand-lead until the diving
bell could be rigged.  The depth of water ranged from thirty-six to
seventy feet at the base of the cliffs.

This cove was an extraordinarily difficult place to work in, there
being no beach and the ramparts of rock towering straight from the
water to heights of from one hundred to two hundred feet.  Said Captain
Dickinson:

"On viewing this terrific place, with the knowledge that at the time of
the shipwreck the wind was from the southward, I was struck with
astonishment, and it appeared quite a mystery that so great a number of
lives could have been saved; and indeed it will never cease to be so,
for that part at which the crew landed is so difficult of access, that
(even in fine weather), after being placed by a boat on the rock at the
base, it required considerable strength and agility, with the
assistance of a man-rope, to climb the precipitous face of the cliff;
and I am certain that in the hour of extreme peril, when excess of
exertion was called forth, there must have been a most extraordinary
display of it by a few for the benefit of the whole."

Now, this make-shift diving bell of his had to be suspended from
something in order to be raised and lowered, but neither his own ship,
the Lightning, nor any of the other vessels of the salvage fleet could
be anchored in the cove to serve the purpose because of the grave
danger of being caught on a lee shore.  At first Captain Dickinson
planned to stretch a cable between the cliffs on either side of the
cove but this was found to be impracticable.  Thereupon he proceeded to
fashion a huge derrick from which the diving bell should hang like a
sinker at the end of a fishing-rod.  There was no timber on the cape
that was fit to be worked up by the ship carpenters, but these
worthies, Mr. Batt of the _Warspite_ and Mr. Daniel Jones of the
_Lightning_, were not to be daunted by such a trifling matter as this.
If a derrick was needed, they were the men to make it out of nothing.

What they did was to assemble the broken masts and spars that had
drifted ashore from the wreck of the _Thetis_ and patch them together
into one immense derrick arm which with its gear weighed as much as
forty tons.  It was a masterpiece of ingenuity and seamanship of the
old-fashioned school, such as can no longer be found in navies.  This
breed of handy man at sea belonged with the vanished age of masts and
canvas and "wooden walls."

"Our encampment and the adjacent parts of the island now presented a
bustling, and, I flattered myself, a rather interesting scene," wrote
the commander.  "There were parties of carpenters building the derrick,
making, carrying to the selected situations, and placing the securities
for supporting and working it.  Riggers were preparing the gear for it,
sawyers cutting wood for various purposes, rope-makers making lashing
and seizing stuff from the pieces of cable crept[2] up from the bottom,
and two sets of blacksmiths at their forges; those of the _Warspite_
making hoops, bolts, and nails, from various articles which had been
crept up; and those of the _Lightning_ reducing the large diving bell
and constructing a smaller one; five gangs of excavators leveling
platforms on the heights above the cove, cutting roads to lead to them,
and fixing bolts in numerous parts of the faces of the cliffs; some
were employed in felling trees and cutting grass for the huts while
others were building and thatching them; water carriers were passing to
and from the pool with breakers of water; and the officers were
attending to the different parties assigned to them for their immediate
guidance."

When ready to be placed in position, this derrick, built of odds and
ends, was an enormous spar one hundred and fifty-eight feet long.  To
support it over the water, elaborate devices had to be rigged from the
cliff overhead, and the whole story of this achievement, as related by
Captain Dickinson, reads like such a masterful, almost titanic battle
against odds that it seems worth while quoting at some length:

"We had by this time taken off thirteen feet of the peak of the
northeast cliff, and thereby made a platform of eighty feet by sixty.
On this was placed the _Lightning's_ capstan and four crabs[3] formed
of the heels of the _Thetis's_ topmasts, the _Lightning's_ bower and
stream anchors, and the store anchor, to which was shackled the chain
splicing-tails and several lengths of the _Thetis's_ chain stream cable
which we had recovered, extending several fathoms over the cliff to
attach the standing parts of the topping-lifts and guy-topping-lifts
to, and preserve them from chafing against the rocks.  There were also
eight large bollards[4] placed in proper positions for other
securities.  Four other platforms, each large enough for working a
crab, were made at appropriate parts for using the guys and guy-topping
lifts.  The roads and paths had been cut, extending from our encampment
to those platforms, and from the one to the other of them together
amounted to the length of nearly a mile and a half.  The zig-zag path
down the cliff was finished, and at those parts of the main cliff which
were inaccessible in this manner, rope-ladders were substituted, and
thus a communication was formed with the cove at the point where the
derrick was to be stepped.

"All this being done, the large hawsers were rove through the blocks,
their purchases lashed to them, and partially overhauled over the
cliffs.  The getting the before-mentioned heavy articles up was most
distressingly laborious, for they were obliged to be carried a greater
part of the distance where the surface was covered with a deep loose
sand, and to this cause may be mainly attributed a complaint of the
heart which subsequently attacked several of the people.

"The derrick, which was now composed of twenty-two pieces united by a
great number of dowels and bolts, thirty-four hoops, and numerous
wooldings[5] of four-inch ropes, was finished on the evening of the
7th, and the clothing fitted on, and I now had arrived at a point which
required much foresight and pre-arrangement, namely, the preparation
for erecting it; and it was necessary to weigh with coolness and
circumspection the mode by which this was to be done.

"A party of about sixty of our best hands were employed in getting the
_Lightning's_ chain and hempen stream cables and large hawsers passed
over and around the faces of the cliffs, and the purchases were
sufficiently overhauled to admit of their reaching the derrick, and the
falls brought to the capstan and crabs, ready for heaving it up.  All
who are well acquainted with the character and manners of sailors know
that it is no easy matter to rid them of their habitual heedlessness.
I endeavored to impress them with the need of caution, and the almost
universal answer I got was 'Never fear, sir,' which from the fearless
and careless manner in which it was expressed, was by no means
calculated to remove my apprehensions for their safety.

"The task we had now in hand was one of much danger.  The parties
working over the cliffs were some of them slung in bights of rope, some
supported by man-ropes, some assisting each other by joining hands, and
others holding by the uncertain tenure of a tuft of grass or a twig,
while loose fragments of rock, being disturbed by the gear and by the
men who were working on the upper part, were precipitated amidst those
below, while the sharp crags lacerated the hands and feet and rendered
dodging these dangers extremely difficult.  However, by great attention
on the part of the officers, and by promptitude in giving aid when
required, this very arduous part of our work was performed, which I
sincerely believe could not have been accomplished by any men in the
world but British seamen; the only accidents being some cuts in the
hands and feet, and bruises from falling stones.

"All the gear being prepared, in the evening I arranged the
distribution of my officers with their particular parties at the
capstan, crabs, purchases, etc.  The smallness of the number of hands
sent from the _Warspite_ rendered it necessary that I should have every
working man from the _Lightning_; and on this occasion she was left
with only a few convalescents to take care of her, and even the young
gentlemen[6] were obliged to give their aid at the capstan.  On the
morning of the 9th, the derrick was launched without casualty, and
while the boats were towing it to the cove, all gear was got ready to
be attached to it the moment it arrived at the proper position,
according to the plan I had given.

"It had to be towed for a distance of about a mile, subject to the
influence of a strong current running westward through the gut, at once
exposing us to the two-fold danger of being driven to sea or against
the rocks.  In apprehension of accident from one or the other of these
causes, I had taken the precaution of placing bolts at several points
of the rocks, so that in case of necessity a warp might be made fast.
However, the derrick reached the cove without disaster, and as
everything depended on promptitude of action, I had all the gear fitted
to go with toggles, which so much facilitated the rigging that in one
hour and a half after its arrival, everything was in place and the
_Lightning's_ chain stream cable being made fast to the heel of the
derrick, ready for heaving up, I left the further management in the
cove to Mr. Chatfield, and placed myself upon the main cliff.

"I then gave the order to heave round, and everyone was on the alert;
but we had scarcely brought any considerable strain on the gear when a
report came to me that the heel of the derrick was displaced and driven
into a chasm at the foot of the cliff, an accident which for this time
put an end to further efforts.  I had no alternative but to cast
everything off in a hurry, and if possible return to the harbor with
the derrick; but this had become exceedingly doubtful, for the wind was
much increased since morning, and the current more rapid.  We
repeatedly succeeded in towing the derrick into the gut, and were as
often driven back; till at length we were compelled to make it fast to
the rock outside until a small anchor and some grapnels were laid out,
by which means it was finally warped into the harbor, and by half-past
eleven at night moored near the _Adelaide_.  Undismayed by this
failure, by seven o'clock of the following morning, we were again in
the cove with the derrick.

"The vast weight, the great height of the purchases, the number of
them, and the great distances they were apart, made united effort
impossible, but at the close of the day I had the satisfaction of
seeing this huge spar in the place assigned for it, and the head of it
hove ten feet above the water.  On the 11th, we were again at our
purchases, and the head of the derrick was raised to the angle I had
intended, being about fifty feet above the surface of the sea.

"During the operation of erecting the derrick, it showed great
pliability, the result of being composed of so many pieces, which
obliged us to get numerous additional guys on; and having thus secured
it, we returned to our encampment, all hands greatly fatigued by three
days of the most harassing exertion, from half-past four in the morning
until late at night.  On looking down from the precipice on this
enormous machine, with all its necessary rigging, it became a matter of
astonishment to myself, and I believe to everyone else who saw it, that
with the small means we had, we could have succeeded in such a
situation.  It has been my lot to witness many circumstances in which
there was cause for great solicitude, but never one wherein such
general anxiety was manifested as on this occasion.  If any one thing
had given way, it must have been fatal to the whole--a general crash
would have been inevitable."

Meanwhile, Captain Dickinson had found time to devise a small diving
bell, made from another water tank, which could be operated from spars
and tackle set up on board a launch.  This was employed for exploring
the bottom of the cove in order to find where the treasure was.  The
bell held two men, and there were plenty of volunteers to risk their
lives in the first descent in this little iron pot.  The trip was
disastrous, and the commander described it as follows:

"The water happened to be particularly clear, which gave me an
indistinct sight of the bell at the depth of eight fathoms, and I had
been watching it with breathless anxiety for a long time, when suddenly
a small line of air bubbles rose from about the middle of the hose.  I
instantly gave the word to the men in the launch to make ready to haul
away, but the two men in the bell made no signal to be pulled up.  The
agitation of the sea became greater every minute, and there was a rise
and fall of eight or ten feet of surf against the cliffs.  The danger
was increasing, and I was about to order the bell to be raised when an
immense column of air came bursting up from it.  It had been driven
violently against the rocks, thrown on its side, and filled with water.

"The next moment I saw the two men emerge from the bell and swim to the
surface.  Heans had been entangled in the signal line, but he managed
to release himself, and Dewar bobbed up a few seconds later.  They were
too exhausted to say much, but Heans called to his partner, 'Never
mind, mate, we haven't done with the damn thing yet.'"

These plucky seamen went down again and discovered considerable
wreckage of the lost frigate.  A Brazilian colonel, with a gang of
native Indian divers now appeared on the scene with a great deal of
brag about their ability to find the treasure without any apparatus.
They proved to be pestering nuisances who accomplished nothing and were
sent about their business after several futile attempts under water.
They furnished one jest, however, which helped to lighten the toil.
The bell was being lowered when one of these natives, or _caboclos_,
slid over the side of the boat and disappeared in the green depths.  In
a few seconds, the signal came from the bell to hoist up.  Fearing
trouble, the helpers hoisted lustily, and as the bell approached the
surface, something of a brownish hue was seen hanging to its bottom
which was presently discovered to be the _caboclo_ who had tried to
enter the bell.  The men mistook him for an evil spirit or some kind of
a sea monster and kicked him back into the water outside, and he could
only hang on by the foot-rail, with his head inside the bell.

The first encouraging tidings was signaled from the small diving bell
on March 27th, when a bit of board floated up from the submerged men
with these words written upon it: "Be careful in lowering the bell to a
foot, for we are now over some dollars."  Soon they came up, from seven
fathoms down, with their caps full of silver dollars and some gold.
Captain Dickinson decided to push the search night and day, and the
boats were therefore equipped with torches.  It was a spirited and
romantic scene as he describes it.

"Thetis Cove would have supplied a fine subject for an artist.  The red
glare cast from the torches on every projection of the stupendous
cliffs rendered the deep shadows of their fissures and indentations
more conspicuous.  The rushing of roaring sea into the deep chasms
produced a succession of reports like those of cannon; and the
assembled boats, flashing in and out of the gloom were kept in constant
motion by the long swell.  The experiment succeeded to admiration, and
we continued taking up treasure until two o'clock of the morning of the
first of April, when we were glad to retire; having obtained in the
whole by this attempt, 6326 dollars, 36 pounds, 10 ounces of Plata
pina, 5 pounds, 4 ounces of old silver, 243 pounds, 8 ounces of silver
in bars, and 4 pounds, 8 ounces of gold.  After a little rest we were
again at our employment by half-past five, and proceeded very
prosperously for some hours, and then had to desist because of a
dangerous shift of wind."

As soon as the larger bell and the giant derrick could be put in
service, the happy task of fishing up treasure was carried on at a
great pace.  Unlike many other such expeditions, nothing was done at
haphazard.  The toilers under water "were first to go to the outermost
dollar, or other article of gold they could discover, and to place a
pig of ballast, with a bright tally board fast to it, against and on
the inner side of the nearest fixed rock they could find.  From this
they were then to proceed to take up all that lay immediately on the
surface of the bottom, but not to remove anything else until all that
was visible was obtained.  This being done, they were to return to the
place first searched and passing over the same ground, remove the small
rocks and other articles, one by one, and progressively take up what
might be recovered by such removal, but not on any account to dig
without express orders from me."

Life in the camp on Cape Frio had no holiday flavor, and while there
was continual danger afloat, there were troubles and hardships on
shore.  "In addition to our sufferings from the wind and rain
penetrating our flimsy huts, we were attacked by myriads of tormentors
in the shape of ants, mosquitoes, fleas, and worst of all, jiggers.
Many of the people frequently had their eyes entirely closed from the
stings of the mosquitoes.  At night swarms of fleas assailed us in our
beds, while by day it afforded a kind of amusement to pull up the leg
of one's trousers and see them take flight like a flock of sparrows
from a corn-stack, while there might be a hundred congregated inside
the stocking.  Those little insidious devils, the jiggers, penetrated
the skin in almost all parts of the body, forming a round ball and
causing sores which, being irritated by the sand, became most painful
and troublesome ulcers, and produced lameness to half of our number at
a time.

"Snakes were so numerous that the thatching and almost every nook of
our huts was infested with them.  They were often found in the peoples'
hammocks and clothes, and several were caught on board the ship.  On
one occasion, my clerk's assistant was writing in his hut when a
rustling in the overhanging growth caused him to look up and discover a
huge snake, its head extending several feet inside the hole that served
as a window.  He alarmed the camp, and muskets, cutlasses, sticks, and
every other weapon were caught up.  The snake escaped, but I received
numerous reports of his extraordinary dimensions.  My steward insisted
that it was as big around as his thigh, the sentry said it was as big
as the _Lightning's_ bower cable, and as to length the statements
varied between twenty and thirty feet.  At another time, Mr. Button,
the boatswain, went into the store, in which there was no window, to
get a piece of rope.  Going in from the glare of the sun, the place
appeared dark to him, and he laid hold of what he thought was a length
of rope, pulled lustily at it, and was not undeceived until it was
dragged out into the light.  Then he was horror-struck to find he had
hold of a large snake."

In May, Captain Dickinson was able to send to England in H.M.S. _Eden_,
treasure to the handsome amount of $130,000 in bullion and specie, and
had every promise of recovering most of the remainder of the precious
cargo.  Then a terrific storm swept the cove, totally demolished the
derrick, carried the large diving bell to the bottom, and made hash of
the whole equipment devised with such immense toil and pains.  Was he
discouraged?  Not a bit of it.  He straightway set his men at work to
construct new apparatus with which he fetched up more gold and silver,
to the value of half a million dollars before he forsook the task.
First let him tell you in his own words of that tragic storm and its
results.

"At one o'clock of the morning of May 19th, it blew a perfect gale, the
cove was in a far more disturbed state than I had ever seen it before,
the seas rolled up the cliff to an astonishing height, and by daylight
the cove was in a state of awful commotion.  The spray was driven so
wildly that while standing on the main platform, at an elevation of 155
feet, I was completely wet and could scarcely resist it.  The waves
struck the derrick with steadily increasing force, and I watched it
with all the distressing feelings that a father would evince toward a
favorite child when in a situation of great danger.  By six o'clock the
wind threw the waves obliquely against the southeast cliff, and caused
them to sweep along its whole length until opposed by the opposite
cliff from which as each wave recoiled it was met by the following one,
and thus accumulated, they rose in one vast heap under the derrick
stage, beat it from under the bell, and washed away the air-pump,
air-hoses, and semaphore.  The stage was suspended at a height of
thirty-eight feet above the surface of the sea in ordinary weather,
from which circumstances an idea may be formed of the furious agitation
of the cove.

======================================================================

[Illustration: Thetis Cove in calm weather, showing salvage operations.]

Thetis Cove during the storm which wrecked the salvage equipment.
(From lithographs made in 1836.)

======================================================================

"Nine o'clock arrived, and I had been watching for fourteen hours.  The
constant concussions had caused the gear of the derrick to stretch, and
every blow from the sea caused it to swing and buckle to an alarming
degree.  Nothing more could possibly be done to save it, and I saw
plainly that unless the gale soon ceased its destruction was
inevitable.  I therefore left an officer on watch, and quitted the
cliff to go to my hut and arrange my parties for the work to be put in
hand after the catastrophe.  Presently he came down to meet me, and
reported that a stupendous roller had struck the derrick on its side,
and broke it off twenty feet from the heel.  Thus in one crash was
destroyed the child of my hopes, and in a very short time the derrick
was dashed into six pieces, forming, with the complicated gear, one
confused mass of wreckage."

Before the storm had subsided, the indefatigable seamen, blacksmiths,
and carpenters were solving the problem afresh, just as if there had
not been a clean sweep of their weary months of effort.  This time it
was a new scheme for a suspension cable that had occurred to Captain
Dickinson.  While this work was in progress he made another diving bell
from a water-tank, and succeeded in finding his air pump at the bottom
of the cove.  Two men were drowned in the surf at this stage of
operations, the only fatalities suffered by the heroic company.  The
diving bell was successfully slung from the suspended cable after a
vast deal of ingenious and daring engineering, and by means of it much
treasure was recovered, although the contrivance yawed fearfully under
water and more than once capsized and spilled its crew who fought their
gasping way to the surface.

After fourteen months of incessant toil, the men and officers worn to
the bone and ravaged by fever and dysentery, they had found almost six
hundred thousand dollars in bullion and specie, or three-fourths of the
total amount lost in the _Thetis_.  It had been magnificently
successful salvage, achieved in the face of odds that would have
disheartened a less resourceful and courageous commander than Captain
Thomas Dickinson.  He appears to have been the man in a thousand for
the undertaking.  Then occurred an inexplicable sort of a
disappointment, an act of such gross injustice to him that it can be
explained only on the theory of favoritism at naval headquarters.
Captain Dickinson had a grievance and he describes the beginning of his
troubles in this fashion:

"On the 7th and 8th of March, some more treasure was found in a part
from which we had removed several guns, and here I had determined to
have a thorough examination by digging, feeling assured that here would
be found all the remaining treasure that could be obtained.  Our labors
were drawing to a close, but while I was enjoying the pleasing
anticipation of a speedy and successful termination of the enterprise,
on the 6th I was surprised by the arrival of His Majesty's sloop
_Algerine_, with orders from the Commander-in-Chief to me to resign the
charge to Commander the Honorable J. F. F. de Roos of that sloop.  It
appears that the Admiralty had been led to think that no more property
could be rescued, and therefore ordered my removal.  I could not but
feel this a most mortifying circumstance.  I had been the only person
who had come forward to attempt the recovery of the large property
which was considered to be irretrievably lost; I had devised the whole
of the methods by which a very large portion of it was recovered; I had
endured peril, sickness, toil, and privation during more than a year;
and the work was now reduced to a mere plaything compared with what it
had been, and yet I was not allowed to put the finishing hand to it.
Notwithstanding this, the deep interest I felt in the undertaking
remained unabated, and I was determined that nothing should be wanting
on my part to ensure a successful termination of it."

Quite courteously, Captain Dickinson explained in detail to Commander
the Honorable J. F. F. de Roos the plant and the operations, and even
left for him to fish up a large quantity of treasure already located
and which could be scooped up from the diving bell without difficulty.
"With a feeling which I thought would be appreciated by a brother
officer, I did not attempt to bring up this treasure, but left it for
the benefit of our successors, observing at the time that the world
should not say that I had left them nothing to do but the labor of
removing rocks and rubbish."

The amount subsequently recovered by the _Algerine_ was $161,500, so
that by Captain Dickinson's efforts, and the use of his plans and
equipment, all but one-sixteenth of the lost treasure was restored to
its owners, and of this he himself had raised by far the greater part.
When he returned to England and learned that salvage was to be awarded
to the officers and men who had been engaged in the work, he naturally
regarded himself as the principal salvor.  The Admiralty, in its
inscrutable wisdom, chose to think otherwise, and the underwriters of
Lloyd's, taking their cue from this exalted quarter, regarded poor
Captain Dickinson with the cold and fishy eye of disfavor.  The case
was argued in the Court of Admiralty, and the agents of Admiral Baker,
he who had been in command of the squadron at Rio, set up the claim
that he was the principal salvor, although the fact was plain that he
had nothing whatever to do with recovering the treasure from the
_Thetis_, and not even visited Cape Frio during the year of active
operations.

The judge could not stomach such a high-handed claim as this, and his
decision set aside the admiral in favor of Captain Dickinson and the
crew of the _Lightning_.  The salvage award, however, amounting to
L17,000, was decreed as due also to the company of the _Algerine_,
numbering almost four hundred men, which left small pickings for
Captain Dickinson and his heroes.  This was so obviously unfair that he
appealed to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, which
increased the award by the sum of L12,000, in which Commander the
Honorable J. F. F. de Roos and his belated treasure seekers were not
entitled to share.  The influential committee of Lloyd's thought that
Captain Dickinson should not have been so bumptious in defending his
rights, and because he disagreed with their opinions, they ignored him
in a set of resolutions which speak for themselves:

"1st.  A vote of thanks to Admiral Sir Thomas Baker, for his zeal and
exertions.

"2nd.  The same to Captain de Roos, of the _Algerine_, and a grant of
L2,000 to himself, his officers, and crew, being the amount they would
have received had they been parties to the appeal.

"3rd.  To mark the sense of the meeting of Captain de Roos's conduct,
they further voted to this officer a piece of plate to the value of one
hundred guineas."

In other words, an unimportant naval captain deserved this censure
because he had not been content to take what was graciously flung at
him by Lloyd's and the Admiralty, but had stood up for his rights as
long as he had a shot in the locker.  There is something almost comic
in the figure cut by Commander the Honorable J. F. F  de Roos, who
reaped the reward of another man's labors and received the formal
thanks of Lloyd's as the chief treasure finder of the _Thetis_ frigate.
Captain Thomas Dickinson was a dogged and aggressive sort of person,
not in the least afraid of giving offense in high places, and had he
not been of this stamp of man he would never have fought that winning
fight against obstacles amid the hostile cliffs and waters of desolate
Cape Frio.  He shows his mettle in a fine outburst of protest, the
provocation for which was a sentence in a letter published in a London
newspaper while his case was under discussion: "Had Captain Dickinson
relied on the liberality of Lloyd's Coffee House, _he would not have
been a poorer man_."

This was like a spark in a magazine, and the captain of the _Lightning_
flings back in retort:

"Here, then we arrive at the development of the real feelings of the
Underwriters; here is exposed the head and front of my offending.  Rely
on the liberality of Lloyd's Coffee House!!  So that because I would
not abandon my duty to my officers and crew, or separate my interests
from theirs, and place myself and them at the mercy of the
Underwriters, therefore the enterprise and the services of fourteen
months, besides the rescue of nearly six hundred thousand dollars, are
to be considered as utterly unworthy of mention.  Can it be necessary,
in order to entitle a British officer to honorable mention in Lloyd's
Coffee House that he should abandon a right, and succumbing to the feet
of its mighty Committee, accept a donation, doled out with all the
ostentation of a gratuitous liberality, in place of that reward which
legally took precedence even of the ownership of the property rescued!!"



[1] The matter quoted in this chapter is from the privately printed
account by Captain Dickinson (London, 1836), entitled, "A Narrative of
the Operations for the Recovery of the Public Stores and Treasure sunk
in H.M.S. _Thetis_, at Cape Frio on the coast of Brazil, on the Fifth
December, 1830, to which is prefixed a Concise Account of the Loss of
that Ship."

[2] Dredged.

[3] Portable machines used as capstans.

[4] Strong pieces of timber placed vertically in the ground for
fastening ropes to.

[5] Wrappings.  Captain Kidd uses this old word in his own narrative.
See page 109.  [Transcriber's note: the words "woolding" or "wooldings"
appear nowhere else in this text.]

[6] Midshipmen.




CHAPTER XIII

THE QUEST OF EL DORADO

In our time the golden word _Eldorado_ has come to mean the goal of
unattained desires, the magic country of dreams that forever lies just
beyond the horizon.  Its literal significance has been lost in the
mists of the centuries since when one deluded band of adventurers after
another was exploring unknown regions of the New World in quest of the
treasure city hidden somewhere in the remote interior of South America.
Thousands of lives and millions of money were vainly squandered in
these pilgrimages, but they left behind them one of the most singularly
romantic chapters in the whole history of conquest and discovery.

The legend of El Dorado was at first inspired by the tales of a
wonderful and veritable _dorado_, or gilded man, king of a tribe of
Indians dwelling, at the time of the Spanish conquest, upon the lofty
tableland of Bogota, in what is now the republic of Colombia.  Later
investigations have accepted it as true that such a personage existed
and that the ceremonies concerning which reports were current early in
the sixteenth century took place at the sacred lake of Guatavia.  There
lived on this plateau, in what is still known as the province of
Cundinamarca, small village communities of the Muysca Indians, somewhat
civilized and surrounded on all sides by debased and savage tribes.
They worshiped the sun and moon, performed human sacrifices, and adored
striking natural objects, as was the custom in Peru.

The numerous lakes of the region were holy places, each regarded as the
home of a particular divinity to which gold and emeralds were offered
by throwing them into the water.  Elsewhere than at Guatavita jewels
and objects wrought of gold have been discovered in the process of
draining these little lakes.  Guatavita, however, is most famous of all
because here originated the story of "_el hombre dorado_."  This sheet
of water is a few miles north of the capital city of Santa Fe de
Bogota, more than nine thousand feet above sea level, in the heart of
the Cordilleras.  Near the lake is still the village called Guatavita.

In 1490 the inhabitants were an independent tribe with a ruling chief.
They had among them a legend that the wife of one of the earlier chiefs
had thrown herself into the lake in order to escape punishment and that
her spirit survived as the goddess of the place.  To worship her came
the people of other communities of the region, bringing their gold and
precious stones to cast into the water, and Guatavita was famed for its
religious pilgrimages.  Whenever a new chief, or king, of Guatavita was
chosen, an imposing ceremonial was observed by way of coronation.  All
the men marched to the lake in procession, at the head a great party
wailing, the bodies nude and painted with ocher as a sign of deep
mourning.  Behind them were groups richly decorated with gold and
emeralds, their heads adorned with feathers, cloaks of jaguar skins
hanging from their shoulders.  Many uttered joyful cries or blew on
trumpets and conch-shells.  Then came the priests in long black robes
decorated with white crosses.  At the rear of the procession were the
nobles escorting the newly-elected chief who rode upon a barrow hung
with disks of gold.

His naked body was anointed with resinous gums and covered with gold
dust so that he shone like a living statue of gold.  This was the
gilded man, El Dorado, whose fame traveled to the coast of the
Caribbean.  At the shore of the lake, he and his escort stepped upon a
balsa, or raft made of rushes, and moved slowly out to the middle.
There the gilded one plunged into the deep water and washed off his
precious covering, while with shouts and music the assembled throng
threw their offerings of gold and jewels into the lake.  Then the
worshipers returned to the village for dancing and feasting.[1]  In the
last decade of the fifteenth century, or while Columbus was making his
voyages, the tribe of Guatavita was conquered by a stronger community
of the Muysca race, and the new rulers, being of a thriftier mind, made
an end of the extravagant ceremony of el dorado.  It is therefore
assumed that the gilded man had ceased to be, full thirty years before
the Spaniards first heard of him at the coast.

Humboldt became interested in the legend during his South America
travels and reported:

"I have examined from a geographical point of view the expeditions on
the Orinoco, and in a western and southern direction in the eastern
side of the Andes, before the tradition of El Dorado was spread among
the conquerors.  This tradition had its origin in the kingdom of Quito
where Luiz Daza, in 1535, met with an Indian of New Granada who had
been sent by his prince, the Zipa of Bogota, or the Caique of Tunja, to
demand assistance from Atahuahalpa, the last Inca of Peru.  This
ambassador boasted, as was usual, of the wealth of his country; but
what particularly fixed the attention of the Spaniards who were
assembled with Daza was the history of a lord who, his body covered
with gold dust, went into a lake amid the mountains.

"As no historical remembrance attaches itself to any other mountain
lake in this vicinity, I suppose the reference to be made to the sacred
lake of Guatavita, in the plains of the Bogota, into which the gilded
lord was made to enter.  On the banks of this lake I saw the remains of
a staircase, hewn in the rock, and used for the ceremonies of ablution.
The Indians told me that powder of gold and golden vessels were thrown
into this lake as a sacrifice to the _Adoratorio_ de Guatavita.
Vestiges are still found of a breach made by the Spaniards in order to
drain the lake....  The ambassador of Bogota, whom Daza met in the
kingdom of Quito, had spoken of a country situated towards the east."

The latter reference means that the legend had spread from coast to
coast.  On the Pacific, the _conquistadores_ of Pizarro were for a time
too busily engaged in looting the enormous treasures of the last Inca
of Peru to pay much heed to the lure of golden legends beckoning them
further inland.  The first attempt to go in search of the gilded man
and his kingdom was made, not by a Spaniard, but by a German, Ambrosius
Dalfinger, who was in command of a colony of his countrymen settled on
the shore of the Gulf of Venezuela, a large tract of that region having
been leased by Spain to a German company.  He pushed inland to the
westward as far as the Rio Magdalena, treated the natives with horrible
barbarity, and was driven back after losing most of his men.

A few years later, and the legend was magnified into a wondrous
description of a golden city.  In 1538, there marched from the Atlantic
coast, Gonzalo Ximenes de Quesada, surnamed _El Conquistador_, to find
the El Dorado.  At the head of six hundred and twenty-five
foot-soldiers and eighty-five mailed horsemen, he made his perilous way
up the Rio Magdalena, through fever-cursed swamps and tribes of hostile
natives, enduring hardships almost incredible until at length he came
to the lofty plateau of Bogota, and the former home of the real gilded
man.  More than five hundred of his men had died on the journey of
hunger, illness, and exposure.  He found rich cities and great stores
of gold and jewels, but failed to discover the El Dorado of his dreams.

Many stories were afloat of other treasures to be wrested from the
Muysca chiefs, but Quesada, having no more than a handful of fighting
men, feared to go campaigning until he had made his position secure.
He therefore established a base and laid the foundations of the present
city of Bogota.  One of his scouting parties brought back tidings of a
tribe of very war-like women in the south who had much gold, and in
this way was the myth of the Amazons linked with the El Dorado as early
as 1538.

Now occurred as dramatic a coincidence as could be imagined.  To
Quesada there appeared a Spanish force commanded by Sebastian de
Belalcazar, the conqueror of Quito, who had come all the way from the
Pacific coast, after hearing from an Indian of New Granada the story of
the gilded man.  No sooner had this expedition arrived than it was
reported to Quesada that white men with horses were coming from the
east.  This third company of pilgrims in quest of El Dorado proved to
be Nicholas Federmann and his hard-bitted Germans from the colony in
Venezuela who had followed the trail made by Dalfinger and then plunged
into the wilderness beyond his furthest outpost.

Thus these three daring expeditions, Quesada from the north, Belalcazar
from the south, and Federmann from the east, met face to face on the
hitherto unknown plateau of Cundinamarca.  None had been aware of the
others' march in search of this goal, and each had believed himself to
be the discoverer of this country.  They were ready to fly at one
another's throats, for there could be no amity when gold was the prize
at stake.  Curiously enough the three forces were evenly matched in
fighting strength, each with about one hundred and sixty men.  One
might think that the two Spanish parties would have united to drive the
Germans from the home of El Dorado, but greed stifled all natural ties
and emotions.

A conflict was averted by the tact and sagacity of Quesada and the
priests of the expeditions who acted as a committee of arbitration.  It
was finally agreed among the leaders that the several claims should be
submitted to the Spanish Court, and Quesada, Belalcazar, and Federmann
set out for Spain to appear in person, leaving their forces in
possession of the disputed territory.  The command of the Spanish
troops was turned over to Hernan Perez de Quesada, the cruel and greedy
brother of the leader, who fortified himself at Bogota and proceeded to
rob the Muysca people of the last ounce of gold that could be extorted
by means of torture and all manner of unspeakable wickedness.  In 1540
he tried to drain the lake of Guatavita, tempted by the stories of the
vast treasures of gold and jewels that, for centuries, had been thrown
into the water by the worshipers, but he recovered valuables only to
the amount of four thousand ducats.  It was the remains of his drainage
tunnel which Humboldt found and made note of.

With the conquest of this region was obtained the last great store of
gold discovered by the plundering Spaniards in South America.  These
explorers finished when [Transcriber's note: what?] Pizarro had begun
in Peru.  To convey the treasure from Bogota to the coast of the
Carribean a road was built through the mountains, much of it cut as a
narrow shelf in solid rock, winding and dipping in a dizzy route to
connect with the upper reaches of navigation on the Rio Magdalena.
This was the famous _El Camino Real_, or "King's Highway" which is
still used as one of the roads by which the capital of Colombia, Santa
Fe de Bogota is reached by the traveler of the twentieth century.  It
was to intercept one of these treasure trains that Amyas Leigh and his
doughty comrades of "Westward Ho!" lay in wait, and the fiction of
Kingsley will better serve to portray the time and place than the facts
as the old historians strung them together.

"Bidding farewell once and forever to the green ocean of the eastern
plains, they have crossed the Cordillera; they have taken a longing
glance at the city of Santa Fe, lying in the midst of rich gardens on
its lofty mountain plateau, and have seen, as was to be expected, that
it was far too large for any attempt of theirs.  But they have not
altogether thrown away their time.  Their Indian lad has discovered
that a gold-train is going down from Santa Fe toward the Magdalena; and
they are waiting for it beside the miserable rut that serves for a
road, encamped in a forest of oaks which would make them almost fancy
themselves back in Europe were it not for the tree-ferns which form the
undergrowth; and were it not for the deep gorges opening at their very
feet; in which while their brows are swept by the cool breezes of a
temperate zone, they can see far below, dim through their everlasting
vapor bath of rank, hot steam, the mighty forms and gorgeous colors of
the tropic forest.

"... At last, up from beneath there was a sharp crack and a loud cry.
The crack was neither the snapping of a branch, nor the tapping of a
woodpecker; the cry was neither the scream of a parrot, nor the howl of
a monkey.

"'That was a whip's crack,' said Yeo, 'and a woman's wail.  They are
close here, lads!'

"'A woman's?  Do they drive women in their gangs?' asked Amyas.  'Why
not, the brutes?  There they are, sir.  Did you see their basnets
glitter?'

"'Men!' said Amyas in a low voice.  'I trust you all not to shoot till
I do.  Then give them one arrow, out swords, and at them!  Pass the
word along.'

"Up they came, slowly, and all hearts beat loud at their coming.
First, about twenty soldiers, only one half of whom were on foot; the
other half being borne, incredible as it may seem, each in a chair on
the back of a single Indian, while those who marched had consigned
their heaviest armor and their arquebuses into the hands of attendant
slaves, who were each pricked on at will by the pikes of the soldiers
behind them....  Last of this troop came some inferior officer also in
his chair, who as he went slowly up the hill, with his face turned
toward the gang which followed, drew every other second the cigar from
his lips to inspirit them with those pious ejaculations ... which
earned for the pious Spaniards of the sixteenth century the
uncharitable imputation of being the most abominable swearers in Europe.

"... A line of Indians, Negroes, and Zamboes, naked, emaciated, scarred
with whips and fetters, and chained together by their left wrists,
toiled upwards, panting and perspiring under the burden of a basket
held up by a strap which passed across their foreheads.  Yeo's sneer
was but too just; there were not only old men and youths among them,
but women; slender young girls, mothers with children running at their
knee; and at the sight, a low murmur of indignation rose from the
ambushed Englishmen, worthy of the free and righteous hearts of those
days, when Raleigh could appeal to man and God, on the ground of a
common humanity, in behalf of the outraged heathens of the New World.

"But the first forty, so Amyas counted, bore on their backs a burden
which made all, perhaps, but him and Yeo, forget even the wretches who
bore it.  Each basket contained a square package of carefully corded
hide; the look whereof friend Amyas knew full well.

"'What's in they, Captain?'

"'Gold!'  And at that magic word all eyes were strained greedily
forward, and such a rustle followed that Amyas, in the very face of
detection, had to whisper:

"'Be men, be men, or you will spoil all yet.'"


The muskets and long-bows of the stout Englishmen avenged the wrongs of
this pitiable caravan, although there was no help for a vast multitude
of Indians who were put to death with devilish torments by their
conquerors.  But the legend of the El Dorado still survived and it
spread like an avenging spirit.  "Transplanted by the over-excited
imagination of the white man, the vision appeared like a mirage
enticing, deceiving and leading men to destruction, on the banks of the
Orinoco, and the Amazon, in Omagua and Parime."  The conquest of Bogota
made them believe that the gilded man and his golden kingdom were
somewhere just beyond.  The licentiate, Juan de Castellanos, wrote a
poem which was published in 1589, telling of the legend as it had
existed in Quito in the days of the _Conquistadores_.

  "When with that folk came Annasco,
  Benalcazar learned from a stranger
  Then living in the city of Quito,
  But who called Bogota his home,
  Of a land there rich in golden treasure,
  Rich in emeralds glistening the rock.
  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .
  A chief was there, who stripped of vesture,
  Covered with golden dust from crown to toe,
  Sailed with offerings to the gods upon a lake
  Borne by the waves upon a fragile raft,
  The dark flood to brighten with golden light."[2]


Another and more imaginative version of the story was told to Oviedo[3]
by divers Spaniards whom he met in San Domingo.  They had heard from
Indians in Quito that the great lord, El Dorado, always went about
covered with powdered gold, because he thought this kind of garment
more beautiful and distinguished than any decorations of beaten gold.
The lesser chiefs were in the habit of adorning themselves likewise,
but were not so lavish as the king who put on his gold dust every
morning and washed it off at night.  He first anointed himself with a
fragrant liquid gum, to which the gold dust adhered so evenly that he
resembled a brilliant piece of artfully hammered gold metal.

For more than half a century, the mad quest continued, and always there
came tragedy and disaster.  The German colony of Venezuela was wiped
out because of these futile expeditions into the interior.  Gonzalo
Pizarro, brother of the great Francisco, set out to find the city of
legend, and returned after two years, in such dreadful plight that the
survivors of the party looked more like wild animals than men, "so that
one could no longer recognize them."  Pedro de Urzua started from
Bogota to find a "golden city of the sun," and his expedition founded
the town of Pampluna.  In 1560 the same leader was appointed "governor
of Omagua and El Dorado," and he set out to find his domain by way of
the Amazon.  Urzua was murdered by Lope de Aguirre who treacherously
conspired against him, and Aguirre descended the great river and
finally reached Venezuela after one of the maddest piratical cruises
ever recorded.  Guimilla, in a "History of the Oronoke," says:

"I find it (El Dorado) related with such an exact description of the
country, as the missionaries of my province and myself have recognized,
that I cannot doubt it.  I have seen in the jurisdiction of Varinas, in
the mountains of Pedrarca, in 1721, the brass halberd which Urzua took
with him in his expedition.  I have been acquainted with Don Joseph
Cabarte who directed for thirty years the missions of Agrico and the
Oronoke, the countries traversed by Urzua, and he appeared to be fully
persuaded that that was the route to El Dorado."

Meanwhile the myth had assumed new forms.  On the southwestern
tributaries of the Amazon were the fabled districts of Enim and Paytiti
said to have been founded by Incas who had fled from Peru and to have
surpassed ancient Cuzco in splendor.  North of the Amazon the supposed
city of El Dorado moved eastward until in Raleigh's time it was
situated in Guiana beside Lake Parima.  This lake remained on English
maps until the explorations of Schomburgh in the nineteenth century
proved that it was nothing more than a pond in a vast swamp.  The
emerald mountain of Espirito Santo and the Martyrios gold mine, long
sought for in Western Brazil recalled the El Dorado myth; while far to
the southward in the plains of the Argentine the city of Caesar, with
silver walls and houses was another alluring and persistent phantom.
It was said to have been founded by shipwrecked Spanish sailors, and
even late in the eighteenth century expeditions were sent in search for
it.

It was not until 1582 that the Spanish ceased to pursue the fatal
phantom city of El Dorado and Southey's History of the Brazils is
authority for the statement that these "expeditions cost Spain more
than all the treasures she had received from her South American
possessions."  There is more meaning than appears on the surface in the
Spanish proverb, "Happiness is only to be found in El Dorado which no
one yet has been able to reach."

Alas, that Sir Walter Raleigh should have been lured to seek in Guiana
the fabled El Dorado which had now become the splendid city of Manoa
built on the shores of a vast inland lake of salt water.  It was in
this guise that he heard the transplanted and exaggerated story of the
gilded man.  His own narrative, as included in Hakluyt's Voyages, is
entitled:[4]

"The discovery of the large, rich and beautiful Empire of Guiana, with
a relation of the great and golden city of Manoa (which the Spaniards
call El Dorado) and the provinces of Emeria, Aromaia, Amapaia, and
other countries, with their rivers adjoining.  Performed in the year
1595 by Sir Walter Raleigh, Knight, Captain of Her Majesty's Guard,
Lord Warden of the Stanneries, and Her Highness' Lieutenant General of
the County of Cornwall."

It was while touching at the island of Trinidad, outward bound, that
Raleigh had the misfortune to learn the story of a picturesque liar by
the name of Juan Martinez, a derelict Spanish seaman, who had sailed
with the explorer Diego de Ordas in 1531.  "The relation of this
Martinez (who was the first that discovered Manoa) his success and end
are to be seen in the Chancery of Saint Juan de Puerto Rico," writes
Raleigh, "whereof Berreo had a copy, which appeared to be the greatest
encouragement as well to Berreo as to others that formerly attempted
the discovery and conquest.  Orellana, after he failed of the discovery
of Guiana by the said river of the Amazon, passed into Spain, and there
obtained a patent of the king for the invasion and conquest, but died
by sea about the Islands, and his fleet severed by tempest, the action
for that time proceeded not.  Diego Ordas followed the enterprise, and
departed Spain with six hundred soldiers and thirty horse, who arriving
on the coast of Guiana, was slain in mutiny, with the most part of such
as favored him, as also of the rebellious part, insomuch as his ships
perished, and few or none returned, neither was it certainly known what
became of the said Ordas until Berreo found the anchor of his ship in
the river of Orinoco; but it was supposed, and so it is written by
Lopez that he perished on the seas, and of other writers diversely
conceived and reported.

======================================================================

[Illustration: Sir Walter Raleigh.]

======================================================================

"And hereof it came that Martinez entered so far within the land and
arrived at that city of Inca, the Emperor; for it chanced that while
Ordas with his army rested at the port of Morequito (who was either the
first or second that attempted Guiana) by some negligence the whole
store of powder provided for the service was set on fire; and Martinez
having the chief charge[5] was condemned by the General Ordas to be
executed forthwith.  Martinez, being much favored by the soldiers, had
all the means possible procured for his life; but it could not be
obtained in other sort than this; That he should be set into a canoe
alone without any victuals, only with his arms, and so turned loose
into the great river.

"But it pleased God that the canoe was carried down the stream and that
certain of the Guianians met it the same evening; and having not at any
time seen any Christian, nor any man of that color, they carried
Martinez into the land to be wondered at, and so from town to town,
until he came to the great city of Manoa, the seat and residence of
Inca, the Emperor.  The emperor after he had beheld him, knew him to be
a Christian (for it was not long before that his brethren Guascar[6]
and Atabalipa[6] were vanished [Transcriber's note: vanquished?] by the
Spaniards in Peru) and caused him to be lodged in his palace and well
entertained.  He lived seven months in Manoa, but was not suffered to
wander into the country anywhere.  He was also brought thither all the
way blindfold, led by the Indians, until he came to the entrance of
Manoa itself, and was fourteen or fifteen days in the passage.  He
avowed at his death that he entered the city at noon, and then they
uncovered his face, and that he traveled all that day till night
through the city and the next day from sun rising to sun setting ere he
came to the palace of Inca.

"After that Martinez had lived seven months in Manoa, and began to
understand the language of the country, Inca asked him whether he
desired to return into his own country, or would willingly abide with
him.  But Martinez not desirous to stay, obtained the favor of Inca to
depart; with whom he sent divers Guianians to conduct him to the river
of Orinoco, all laden with as much gold as they could carry, which he
gave to Martinez at his departure.  But when he was arrived near the
river's side, the borderers which are called Orenoqueponi robbed him
and his Guianians of all the treasure (the borderers being at that time
at war, which Inca had not conquered) save only of two great bottles of
gourds, which were filled with beads of gold curiously wrought, which
those Orenoqueponi thought had been no other thing than his drink or
meat, or grain for food, with which Martinez had liberty to pass.

"And so in canoes he fell down from the river of Orinoco to Trinidad
and from thence to Margarita, and also to Saint Juan de Puerto Eico,
where remaining a long time for passage into Spain, he died.  In the
time of his extreme sickness, and when he was without hope of life,
receiving the Sacrament at the hands of his confessor, he delivered
these things, with the relation of his travels, and also called for his
calabazas or gourds of the gold beads which he gave to the church and
friars to be prayed for.

"This Martinez was he that christened the city of Manoa by the name of
El Dorado, and as Berreo informed me, upon this occasion; Those
Guianians, and also the borderers, and all others in that tract which I
have seen, are marvelous great drunkards; in which vice, I think no
nation can compare with them; and at the times of their solemn feasts
when the emperor carouseth with his captains, tributaries, and
governors the manner is thus:

"All those that pledge him are first stripped naked, and their bodies
anointed all over with a kind of white balsam (by them called _curca_)
of which there is great plenty, and yet very dear amongst them, and it
is of all other the most precious, whereof we have had good experience.
When they are anointed all over, certain servants of the emperor,
having prepared gold made into fine powder, blow it through hollow
canes upon their naked bodies, until they be all shining from the foot
to the head: and in this sort they sit drinking by twenties, and
hundreds, and continue in drunkenness sometimes six or seven days
together.

"The same is also confirmed by a letter written into Spain, which was
intercepted, which Mr. Robert Dudley told me he had seen.  Upon this
sight, and for the abundance of gold which he saw in the city, the
images of gold in their temples, the plates, armors, and shields of
gold which they used in the wars, he called it El Dorado."


After mentioning in detail the several ill-fated expeditions of the
Spanish to find the El Dorado, Raleigh reviews the mass of evidence in
favor of the existence of the hidden and magnificent city, and as
gravely relates the current reports of other wonders as prodigious as
this.  He it was who carried back to Europe the story of the Amazons,
"being very desirous to understand the truth of those warlike women,
because of some it is believed, of others not.  And although I digress
from my purpose, yet I will set down that which hath been delivered me
for truth of those women, and I spake with a caique or lord of the
people, that told me he had been in the river and beyond it....  They
are said to be very cruel and bloodthirsty, especially to such as offer
to invade their territories.  These Amazons have likewise great stores
of these plates of gold which they recover chiefly by exchange for a
kind of green stones."  That the natures of these stern ladies had a
softer side is prettily indicated by Raleigh in the statement that in
the month of April "all kings of the border assemble, and queens of the
Amazons; and after the queens have chosen, the rest cast lots for their
Valentines.  This one month they feast, dance, and drink of their wines
in abundance; and the moon being done, they all depart to their own
provinces."

Among the perils that beset the road to El Dorado was a terrible nation
of men with no heads upon their shoulders.  Raleigh did not happen to
encounter them during his voyage up the Orinoco, but nevertheless he
took pains to set down in his narrative, "which though it may be
thought a mere fable, yet for mine part I am resolved it is true,
because every child in the provinces of Arromaia and Canuri affirm the
same.  They are called Ewaipanoma; they are reported to have their eyes
in their shoulders, and their mouths in the middle of their breasts and
that a long train of hair groweth backward between their shoulders.[7]
The son of Topiawari, which I brought with me into England told me that
they are the most mighty men of all the land, and use bows, arrows, and
clubs thrice as big as any of Guiana, or of the Orinoco, and that one
of the Iwarawakeri took a prisoner of them the year before our arrival
there, and brought him into the borders of Aromaia, his father's
country.  And farther when I seemed to doubt of it, he told me that it
was no wonder among them, but that they were as great a nation, and as
common as any other in all the provinces, and had of late years slain
many hundreds of his father's people: but it was not my chance to hear
of them until I was come away, and if I had but spoken but one word of
it while I was there, I might have brought one of them with me to put
the matter out of doubt.  Such a nation was written of by Mandeville[8]
whose reports were holden for fables many years, and yet since the East
Indies were discovered, we find his relations true of all things as
heretofore were held incredible.  Whether it be true or no, the matter
is not great, neither can there be any profit in the imagination.  For
my own part, I saw them not, but I am resolved that so many people did
not all combine or forethink to make the report.

"When I came to Cumana in the West Indies, afterwards by chance I spake
with a Spaniard dwelling not far from thence, a man of great travel,
and after he knew that I had been in Guiana, and so far directly west
as Caroli, the first question he asked me was, whether I had seen any
of the Ewaipanoma, which are those without heads: who being esteemed a
most honest man of his word, and in all things else, told me he had
seen many of them."

That Sir Walter Raleigh, the finest flower of manhood that blossomed in
his age, should have believed these and other wonders does not belittle
his fame.  He lived and fought and sailed in a world that had not been
explored and mapped and charted and photographed and written about
until all the romance and mystery were driven out of it.  The globe had
not shrunk to a globule around which excursionists whiz in forty days
on a coupon ticket.  Men truly great, endowed with the courage and
resourcefulness of epic heroes, and the simple faith of little
children, were voyaging into unknown seas to find strange lands, ready
to die, and right cheerfully, for God and their King.  Sir Walter
Raleigh was bound up, heart and soul, in winning Guiana as a great
empire for England, and when his enemies at home scouted his reports
and accused him of trying to deceive the nation with his tales of El
Dorado, he replied with convincing sincerity and pathos:

"A strange fancy it had been in me, to have persuaded my own son whom I
have lost, and to have persuaded my wife to have adventured the eight
thousand pounds which his Majesty gave them for Shelborne, and when
that was spent, to persuade my wife to sell her house at Mitcham in
hope of enriching them by the mines of Guiana, if I myself had not seen
them with my own eyes!  For being old and weakly, thirteen years in
prison, and not used to the air, to travel and to watching, it being
ten to one that I should ever have returned,--and of which, by reason
of my violent sickness, and the long continuance thereof, no man had
any hope, what madness would have made me undertake the journey, but
the assurance of this mine."[9]

He was referring here to his fourth and last voyage in quest of El
Dorado.  Elizabeth was dead, and James I bore Raleigh no good will.
After the long imprisonment, for thirteen years under suspended
sentence of death, he was permitted to leave the Tower and embark with
a fleet of thirteen ships in 1617, it being particularly enjoined that
he should engage in no hostilities with his dearest enemy, Spain.  It
is generally believed that King James hoped and expected that such a
clash of interests as was almost inevitable in the attempt to plant the
English flag in Guiana would give him a pretext to send Raleigh to the
headman's block.  It was on this voyage that Raleigh lost his eldest
son, besides several of his ships, and utterly failed in the
high-hearted purpose of setting up a kingdom whose capital city should
be that splendid lost city of Manoa.  He was unable to avoid battles
with the insolent Spanish, it was in one of these that his son was
killed, and when he returned to England, the price was exacted and
paid.  Sir Walter Raleigh was executed in the palace yard, Westminster,
and thus perished one who brought great glory to England by land and
sea.

Concerning El Dorado, Raleigh had given credence to no more than was
believed in his time by the Spanish of every port from San Marta on the
Caribbean to Quito on the Pacific.  The old chronicles are full of it.
One instance, chosen almost at random from many of the same kind is
quoted by De Pons in his History of Caraccas.[10]

"When the wild Indian appeared before the Spanish governor of Guiana,
Don Manuel Centurion of Angostura, he was assailed with questions which
he answered with as much perspicuity and precision as could be expected
from one whose most intelligible language consisted in signs.  He,
however, succeeded in making them understand that there was on the
border of Lake Parima a city whose inhabitants were civilized and
regularly disciplined to war.  He boasted a great deal of the beauty of
its buildings, the neatness of its streets, the regularity of its
squares, and the riches of its people.  According to him, the roofs of
its principal houses were either of gold or silver.  The high-priest,
instead of pontifical robes, rubbed his whole body with the fat of the
turtle; then they blew upon it some gold dust, so as to cover his whole
body with it.  In this attire, he performed the religious ceremonies.
The Indian sketched on a table with a bit of charcoal the city of which
he had given a description.

"His ingenuity seduced the governor.  He asked him to serve as a guide
to some Spaniards he wished to send on this discovery, to which the
Indian consented.  Sixty Spaniards offered themselves for the
undertaking, and among others Don Antonio Santos.  They set off and
traveled nearly five hundred leagues to the south, through the most
frightful roads.  Hunger, the swamps, the woods, the precipices, the
heat, the rains, destroyed almost all.  When those who survived thought
themselves four or five days' journey from the capital city and hoped
to reach the end of all their troubles, and the object of their
desires, the Indian disappeared in the night.

"This event dismayed the Spaniards.  They knew not where they were.  By
degrees they all perished but Santos to whom it occurred to disguise
himself as an Indian.  He threw off his clothes, covered his whole body
with red paint, and introduced himself among them by his knowledge of
many of their languages.  He was a long time among them, until at
length he fell within the power of the Portugese established on the
banks of the Rio Negro.  They embarked him on the river Amazon and
after a very long detention, sent him back to his country."

In this very brief survey of the growth and results of the El Dorado
legend, there is no room even to mention many of the most dramatic and
disastrous expeditions which it inspired through the sixteenth century.
It was, in truth, the greatest lost treasure story that the world has
ever known.  The age of those splendid adventurers has vanished,
exploration has proved that the golden city hidden in Guiana was a
myth, but now and again investigation has harked back to the source of
the tradition of the gilded man, at the mountain lake of Guatavita on
the lofty tableland of Bogota.  Hernan de Quesada, first to try to
drain the lake, was followed a few years later by Antonio de Sepulveda
who recovered treasure from the bottom to the amount of more than one
hundred thousand dollars, besides a magnificent emerald which was sold
at Madrid.

Professor Liborio Zerda, of the University of Colombia at Bogota, has
published his results of an exhaustive study of the legend and the
evidence to show that the ceremonies of the gilded man were once
performed at Guatavita.  He describes a group of figures beaten out of
raw gold which was recovered from the lake and is now in the museum of
that city.  It represents the chief and attendants upon a _balsa_, or
raft, and is considered to be a striking confirmation of the tradition.

"Undoubtedly this piece represents the religious ceremony which Zamora
has described," writes Professor Zerda, "with the caique of Guatavita
surrounded by Indian priests, on the raft which was taken on the day of
the ceremony to the middle of the lake.  It may be, as some persons
believe, that Siecha lagune, and not the present Guatavita, was the
place of the _dorado_ ceremony, and consequently the ancient Guatavita.
But everything seems to indicate that there was really once a _dorado_
at Bogota."

Zamora, who wrote in the seventeenth century, recorded that the Indians
believed the spirit of the lake had built a magnificent palace beneath
the water where she dwelt and demanded offerings of gold and jewels,
which belief spread over all the nation of the Muysca and also among
strangers "who all, stricken by this wonderful occurrence, came to
offer their gifts by many different routes, of which even to-day some
signs remain.  In the center of the lake they threw their offerings
with ridiculous and vain ceremonies."

In 1823, Captain Charles Stuart Cochran of the English navy was
traveling in Colombia and he became keenly interested in the lake of
Guatavita and the chances of recovering the lost treasure by means of a
drainage project.  He delved into the old Spanish records, assembled
the traditions that were still alive among the Indians and was
convinced that a fabulous accumulation of gold awaited the enterprise
of modern engineers.  One of the ancient accounts, so he discovered,
related that to escape the cruel persecution of the Spanish conquerors
the wealthy natives threw their gold into the lake, and that the last
caique cast therein the burdens of fifty men laden with gold dust and
nuggets.

Captain Cochran did not succeed in finding the funds needed to
undertake the tempting task, but his information was preserved, and
made some stir in England and France.  It was reserved for twentieth
century treasure seekers to attack the sacred lake of Guatavita, and to
capitalize the venture as a joint stock company with headquarters in
London and a glittering prospectus offering investors an opportunity of
obtaining shares in a prospective hoard of gold and jewels worth
something like a billion dollars.  A concession was obtained from the
government of Colombia, and work begun in 1903.

As an engineering problem, draining the lake seemed practicable and
comparatively inexpensive.  It is a deep, transparent pool, hardly more
than a thousand feet wide, almost circular, and set like a jewel in a
cup-like depression near the top of a cone-shaped peak, several hundred
feet above the nearby plateau.  The tunnel therefore had only to pierce
the hill-side to enter the lake and let the water flow out to the plain
below.  It was estimated that the shaft had to be driven a distance of
eleven hundred feet.

A small village of huts was built to shelter the engineers and
laborers, and rock drilling machinery set up not far from the still
visible remains of one of the shafts dug by the Spanish treasure
seekers of the fifteenth century.  No serious obstacles were
encountered until the tunnel had tapped the bottom of the lake and the
water began to run off through carefully regulated sluices.  Then, as
the surface lowered, and the submerged mud was exposed to the air, it
solidified in a cement-like substance which was almost impossible to
penetrate.  The treasure must have sunk many feet deep in this mud
during four or five centuries, and the workmen found it so baffling
that operations were suspended.  The promoters of the enterprise found
this unexpected obstacle so much more than they had bargained for that
they had to abandon it for lack of resources.  In their turn they had
been thwarted by the spirit of the gilded man, and the treasure of El
Dorado is still beyond the grasp of its eager pursuers.



[1] The performance of these ceremonies is vouched for by Lucas
Fernandez Piedrahita, Bishop of Panama; Pedro Simon, and other early
Spanish historians, translated and quoted by A. F. Bandelier in his
work, "The Gilded Man (El Dorado)."  This version agrees with that
described in the volume written by the modern historian, Dr. Liborio
Zerda, professor of the University of Colombia, _El Dorado, Estudio
Historico, Ethnografico, Y Arqueologico_.

[2] Translated by A. F. Bandelier.

[3] Oviedo, or Oviedo y Valdez, royal histriographer, who witnessed the
first return of Columbus to Spain in 1493.  He was later a treasury
officer at Darien, governor of Cartagena, and _alcaide_ of the fort at
Santo Domingo.  He wrote the first general account of the discoveries
in America, and it has remained a standard authority.  His principal
work is _Historia natural y general de las Indias_ in fifty books.

[4] For the convenience of the reader the spelling has been modernized
in this and the following extracts from Hakluyt.

[5] Martinez was the gunner or officer "who had charge of the
munitions."

[6] Commonly spelled Huascar and Atalualpa.

[7] "Her father loved me, oft invited me,
    Still questioned me the story of my life
    From year to year, the battles, sieges, fortunes,
    That I have pass'd.
    I ran it through, even from my boyish days
    To the very moment that he bade me tell it:
    Wherein I spake of most disastrous chances,
    Of moving incidents by flood and field,
    Of hair-breadth 'scapes i' the imminent deadly breach
    Of being taken by the insolent foe,
    And sold to slavery,'of my redemption thence,
    And portance in my travel's history:
    Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle,
    Rough quarries, rocks, and hills whose head touch heaven,
    It was my hint to speak,--such was the process;
    And of the Cannibals that each other eat,
    The Anthropophagi, and men whose heads
    Do grow beneath their shoulders.  This to hear
    Would Desdemona seriously incline."
        --Shakespeare.  (_The Tragedy of Othello, the Moor of Venice_.)

[8] The date of the first English edition of Sir John Mandeville's book
of travels was 1499.  According to his own account he discovered this
and other wonders in the kingdom of Ethiopia.  The book was widely
read, very popular in several languages, and was one of the earliest
printed books, being published in Germany about 1475.  Recent
investigations have shown that almost the whole of the matter was
cribbed from other authors, and that as a genuine explorer, Sir John
Mandeville was the Dr. Frederick Cook of his age.

[9] Cayley's _Life of Raleigh_.

[10] Translation of J. A. Van Heuvel in his "_El Dorado_.  Being a
Narrative of the Circumstances which gave rise to reports in the
Sixteenth Century of the Existence of a Rich and Splendid City in South
America."  (1844.)




CHAPTER XIV

THE WIZARDRY OF THE DIVINING ROD

Washington Irving was so thoroughly versed in the lore of buried
treasure that the necromancy of the divining rod, as a potent aid to
this kind of industry, had received his studious attention.  For many
centuries, the magic wand of hazel, or various other woods, has been
used, and implicitly believed in, as a guide to the whereabouts of
secrets hidden underground, whether of running water, veins of metal,
or buried treasure.  There is nothing far-fetched, or contrary to the
fact, in the lively picture of Dr. Knipperhausen, that experienced
magician, who helped Wolfert Webber seek the treasure concealed by
pirates on the Manhattan Island of the Knickerbocker Dutch of the
"Tales of a Traveler."

"He had passed some years of his youth among the Harz mountains of
Germany, and had derived much valuable instruction from the miners,
touching the mode of seeking treasure buried in the earth.  He had
prosecuted his studies also under a traveling sage who united the
mysteries of medicine with magic and legerdemain.  His mind therefore
had become stored with all kinds of mystic lore; he had dabbled a
little in astrology, alchemy, divination; knew how to detect stolen
money, and to tell where springs of water lay hidden; in a word, by the
dark nature of his knowledge he had acquired the name of the
High-German-Doctor, which is pretty nearly equivalent to that of
necromancer.

"The doctor had often heard rumors of treasure being buried in various
parts of the island, and had long been anxious to get on the traces of
it.  No sooner were Wolfert's waking and sleeping vagaries confided to
him, than he beheld in them confirmed symptoms of a case of money
digging, and lost no time in probing it to the bottom.  Wolfert had
long been sorely oppressed in mind by the golden secret, and as a
family physician is a kind of father confessor, he was glad of any
opportunity of unburdening himself.  So far from curing, the doctor
caught the malady from his patient.  The circumstances unfolded to him
awakened all his cupidity; he had not a doubt of money being buried
somewhere in the neighborhood of the mysterious crosses and offered to
join Wolfert in the search.

"He informed him that much secrecy and caution must be observed in
enterprises of this kind; that money is only to be digged for at night;
with certain forms and ceremonies, and burning of drugs; the repeating
of mystic words, and above all, that the seekers must first be provided
with a divining rod, which had the wonderful property of pointing to
the very spot on the surface of the earth under which treasure lay
hidden.  As the doctor had given much of his mind to these matters, he
charged himself with all the necessary preparations, and, as the
quarter of the moon was propitious, he undertook to have the divining
rod ready by a certain night.

"Wolfert's heart leaped with joy at having met with so learned and able
a coadjutor.  Everything went on secretly, but swimmingly.  The doctor
had many consultations with his patient, and the good woman of the
household lauded the comforting effect of his visits.  In the meantime
the wonderful divining rod, that great key to nature's secrets, was
duly prepared.

"The following note was found appended to this passage in the
handwriting of Mr. Knickerbocker.  'There has been much written against
the divining rod by those light minds who are ever ready to scoff at
the mysteries of nature; but I fully join with Dr. Knipperhausen in
giving it my faith.  I shall not insist upon its efficacy in
discovering the concealment of stolen goods, the boundary stones of
fields, the traces of robbers and murderers, or even the existence of
subterranean springs and streams of water; albeit, I think these
properties not to be readily discredited; but of its potency in
discovering veins of precious metal, and hidden sums of money and
jewels, I have not the least doubt.  Some said that the rod turned only
in the hands of persons who had been born in particular months of the
year; hence astrologers had recourse to planetary influences when they
would procure a talisman.  Others declared that the properties of the
rod were either an effect of chance or the fraud of the holder, or the
work of the devil...."


The worthy and learned Mr. Knickerbocker might have gone on to quote
authorities by the dozen.  This weighty argument of his is not
delivered with a wink to the reader.  He is engaged in no solemn
foolery.  If one desires to find pirates' gold, it is really essential
to believe in the divining rod and devoutly obey its magic messages.
This is proven to the hilt by that very scholarly Abbe Le Lorrain de
Vallemont of France whose exhaustive volume was published in 1693 with
the title of _La Physique Occulte_, or "Treatise on the Divining Rod
and its Uses for the Discovery of Springs of Water, Metallic Veins,
Hidden Treasure, Thieves, and Escaped Murderers."  In his preface he
politely sneers at those scholars who consider the study of the
divining rod as an idle pursuit and shows proper vexation toward the
ignorance and prejudice which are hostile to such researches.

The author then indicates that the action of the divining rod is to be
explained by the theory of Corpuscular Philosophy,[1] and by way of
concrete argument, refers to the most famous case in the ancient annals
of this art.

======================================================================

[Illustration: Methods of manipulating the diving rod to find buried
treasure.  (_From La Physique Occulte, first edition, 1596_.)]

======================================================================

"It seems to me that my work would have been incomplete, had I not
_seen_ Jacques Aymar, and that the objection might have been raised
that I had only argued about statements not generally accepted.  This
now famous man came to Paris on January 21st, 1693.  I saw him two or
three hours a day for nearly a month, and my readers may rest assured
that during that time I examined him very closely.  It is a positive
fact that the divining rod turned in his hands in the direction of
springs of water, precious metals, thieves, and escaped murderers.  He
does not know why.  If he knew the physical cause, and had sufficient
intellect to reason about it, I am convinced that, whenever he
undertook an experiment he would succeed.  But a peasant who can
neither read nor write will know still less about _atmosphere, volume,
motion of corpuscles distributed in the air, etc_.  He is still more
ignorant as to how these _corpuscles_ can be disturbed and cease to
produce the motion and dip of the rod.  Neither is he capable of
recognizing how essential to success it is for him to know whether he
is in a fit condition to be susceptible to the action of the
_corpuscles_ which are thrown off from the objects toward which the rod
inclines."

"I do not deny that there are cheats who profess belief in the rod, and
put it to too many uses, just as quacks, with a good remedy for a
special ailment, hold themselves up to contempt by wishing to palm it
off as a cure-all.  To this I add that people will be found who,
endowed with greater and more delicate sensibility, will possess still
more abundantly than he (Jacques Aymar) the faculty of discovering
springs of water, metallic veins, and hidden treasure, as well as
thieves and escaped murderers.  We have already received tidings from
Lyons of a youth of eighteen, who surpasses by a long way Jacques
Aymar.  And anyone can see in Paris to-day, at the residence of Mons.
Geoffrey, late sheriff of that city, a young man who discovers gold
buried underground by experiencing violent tremors the moment that he
walks over it."

M. de Vallemont has no sympathy for those credulous students of natural
philosophy who have brought the science into disrepute.  They will
scoff at the divining rod and yet swallow the grossest frauds without
so much as blinking.  He proceeds to give an illustration, and it will
bear translating because surely it unfolds a unique yarn of buried
treasure and has all the charm of novelty.

"Upon this subject there is nothing more entertaining than that which
took place at the end of the last century, with regard to a boy who
journeyed through several towns exhibiting a golden tooth which he
declared had grown in the usual way.

"In the year 1595, towards Easter, a rumor spread that there was in the
village of Weildorst in Silesia, Bohemia, a child seven years of age
who had lost all his teeth, and that in the place of the last molar a
gold tooth had appeared.  No story ever created such a stir.  Scholars
took it up.  In a short time, doctors and philosophers came forward to
gain knowledge and to pass judgment, as though it were a case worthy of
their consideration.  The first to distinguish himself was _Jacobus
Horstius_, Professor of Medicine in the University of Helmstad.  This
doctor, in a paper which he caused to be printed, demonstrated that
this golden tooth was partly a work of nature and partly miraculous;
and he declared that in whatever light one viewed it, it was manifestly
a consolation sent from above to the Christians of Bohemia, on whom the
Turks were then inflicting the worst barbarities.

"_Martinus Rulandus_ published simultaneously with Horstius the story
of the golden tooth.  It is true that two years later _Johannes
Ingolsteterus_ refuted the story of Rulandus, but the latter in the
same year, 1597, not in the least discouraged, defended his work
against the attacks of Ingolsteterus.

"_Andreas Libavius_ then entered the lists, and published a book in
which he recounted what had been said for and against the golden tooth.
This gave rise to great disputes concerning a matter which ultimately
proved to be a somewhat clumsy deception.  The child was taken to
Breslau, where everybody hastened to see so wonderful a novelty.  They
brought him before a number of doctors, assembled in great perplexity
to examine the famous golden tooth.  Amongst them was _Christophorus
Rhumbaumius_, a professor of medicine, who was most anxious to see
before believing.

"First of all, a goldsmith, wishing to satisfy himself that the tooth
was of gold, applied to it his touch-stone, and the line left on the
stone appeared, to the naked eye, to be in real gold, but on the
application of aqua fortis to this line, every trace disappeared, and a
part of the swindle was exposed.  Christophorus Khumbaumius, an
intelligent and skillful man, on examining the tooth more closely,
perceived in it a little hole, and, inserting a probe, found that it
was simply a sheet of copper probably washed with gold.  He could with
ease have removed the copper covering had not the trickster, who was
taking the child from town to town, opposed it, complaining bitterly of
the injury that was being done him by thus depriving him of the chance
of taking money from the curious and the credulous.

"The swindler and child disappeared, and no one knows to this day
exactly what became of them.  But because learned men have been duped
now and then, that is no reason for perpetual doubt.... and although
the story of the golden tooth be false, we should be wrong capriciously
to reject that of the hazel rod which has become so famous."

Having extinguished the skeptics, as one snuffs a candle, by means of
this admirable tale of the golden tooth, the learned author asserts
that "it must denote great ignorance of France, and even of books,
never to have heard of the divining rod.  For I can say with certainty
that I have met quite by chance, both in Paris and the provinces, more
than fifty persons who have used this simple instrument in order to
find water, precious metals and hidden treasure, and in whose hands it
has actually turned.  'It is more reasonable,' says Father Malebranche,
'to believe one man who says, _I have seen_, than a million others who
talk at random.'

"It is somewhat difficult to determine exactly the period at which the
divining rod first came into use.  I have discovered no reference to it
by writers previous to the middle of the Fifteenth century.  It is
frequently referred to in the Testament de Basile Valentin, a
Benedictine monk who flourished about 1490,[2] and I observe that he
speaks of it in a way which might lead one to suppose that the use of
this rod was known before that period.

"Might we venture to advance the theory that the Divine Rod was known
and used nearly two thousand years ago?[3]  Are we to count for naught
Cicero's illusion to divination by means of the rod, at the end of the
first book of his 'De Officiis,' 'If all that we need for our
nourishment and clothing comes to us, as people say, by means of some
divine rod, then each of us should relinquish public affairs and devote
all his time to the study.'

"Varro, according to Vetranius Maurus, left a satire called 'Virgula
Divina,' which was often quoted by Nonius Marcellus in his book
entitled _de Proprietate sermonum_.  But what serves to convince me
that Cicero had in his mind the hazel twig, and that it was known at
that period, is the passage he quotes from Ennius, in the first half of
his 'De Divinatione,' in which the poet, scoffing at those who for a
drachma profess to teach the art of discovering hidden treasure, says
to them, 'I will give it you with pleasure, but it will be paid out of
the treasure found according to your method.'"


And so this seventeenth century Frenchman, his manner as wise as a
tree-full of owls, drones along from one musty authority to another in
defense of the mystic powers of the divining rod.  He marshals them in
batteries of heavy artillery--names of scholars and alleged scientists
who made a great noise in their far-off times when the world was
younger and more given to wonderment.  The discussions that raged among
those Dry-as-dusts have interest to-day because the doctrine of the
divining rod is still vigorously alive and its rites are practiced in
every civilized country.  Call it what you will, a curiously surviving
superstition or a natural mystery, the "dowser" with his forked twig of
hazel or willow still commands a large following of believers and his
services are sought, in hundreds of instances every year, to discover
springs of water and hidden treasure.  Learned societies have not done
with debating the case, and the literature of the phenomenon is in
process of making.  No one, however, has contributed more formidable
ammunition than M. de Vallemont, who could discharge such broadsides as
this:

"Father Roberti, who writes in the strongest terms against the divining
rod, nevertheless admits, in the heat of the conflict, that the
indications on which the most scholarly of men set to work to discover
mineral soil are all more or less unreliable, and result in endless
mistakes.

"'What!' says this Jesuit father, 'is it possible that people are
willing to attribute greater knowledge and judgment to a rough and
lifeless piece of wood than to hundreds of enlightened men?  They
survey fields, mountains and valleys, devoting scrupulous attention to
everything that comes under their notice; not a trace of metal do they
discover; and if they happen to suspect that there might be such a
thing at a certain spot, they confess that their surmise may be quite
unfounded, and that every day they learn to their sorrow, after
infinite labor and suspense, that their signs are altogether deceptive.

"'Such a one as Goclenius,[4] however, armed with his fork, will wander
over the same ground, and led by that instrument, clearer-sighted than
the wisest of men, will infallibly come to a standstill over treasures
hidden in the earth.  Excavations will be made at the spot indicated
and the treasures will be laid bare.  _My dear reader, do you wish me
to speak candidly?  It is the Devil who is guiding Goclenius_.'"

In this emphatic statement of the devout French priest of two centuries
ago is to be traced the still lingering superstition of an infernal
partnership in buried treasure.  It is to be found in scores of
coastwise legends of pirates' gold (no Kidd story is properly decorated
without its guardian demon or menacing ghost), and the divining rod,
handed down from an age of witchcraft, necromancy, and black magic,
deserves a place in the kit of every well-equipped treasure seeker.
Sober, hard-headed Scotchmen from Glasgow employ a Yorkshire "dowser"
to search for the treasure lost in the _Florencia_ galleon in Tobermory
Bay, and he shows them, and they are convinced, that he can tell
whether it be gold, or silver, or copper, which exerts its occult
influence over his divining rod.[5]  This happens in the year 1906,
mind you, but our ardent investigator, M. de Vallemont, was writing two
hundred years before:

"But, with the divining rod, it is possible to distinguish what metal
is contained in the mine towards which the rod inclines.  For if a gold
coin be placed in each hand, the rod will only turn in the direction of
gold, because it becomes impregnated with the _corpuscles_ or minute
particles of gold.  If silver be treated in the same way, the rod will
only dip towards silver.  This, at any rate, is what we are told by
those who pride themselves on their successful use of the rod."

John Stears, the expert diviner, who was recently employed at Tobermory
Bay, is more frequently retained to search for water than for lost
treasure.  This is his vocation and he takes it seriously enough, as
his own words indicate:[6]

"The power is not in the rod, but in the user, the rod acting as an
indicator, and rising when over a stream.  By moving the arms as I
proceed, I can keep on the edge of an underground stream, for the apex
descends when the rod is not over the stream.  I have several times
followed a line of water down to the shore, being rowed out in the bay,
and found the water boiling up mixed with land weeds.  At such a spot
there is no movement of the rod except over the course of the stream.
It is almost impossible to describe the sensation caused whilst using
the rod; it is sometimes like a current of electricity going through
the arms and legs.  On raising one foot from the ground the rod
descends.  The effect produced when walking is that the rod has the
appearance of a fishing rod when the fish is hooked,--the rod seems
alive.  Move it clear of the line of water and down it goes.

"Very few people have the gift of finding water or minerals, and not
many rods will do, but those that have thorns on them are all right.
In the tropics I used acacia, and in southern Europe the holly or
orange.  The use of the rod is exhausting.  If I have been at it a few
hours, the power gradually gets less.  A rest and some sandwiches
produce fresh power, and I can start again.

"I think the friction of the water against the rock underground must
cause some electric current, for if the person using the rod stands on
a piece of glass, india-rubber, or other insulating material, all power
leaves him.

"In Cashmere, the rod is used before a well is sunk, and when the
French army went to Tonkin, they used the rod for finding drinking
water at their camps, as they feared the wells were poisoned."

If the divining rod is able to fathom the secrets of underground water
channels, it must be as potent in the case of buried treasure.  Several
years ago, the claims of the modern "dowsers" were investigated by no
less an authority than Professor W. F. Barrett, holding the chair of
Experimental Physics in the Royal College of Science for Ireland.  The
results were presented to the Society of Psychical Research and
published in two volumes of its proceedings.  He said in his
introductory pages:

"At first sight, few subjects appear to be so unworthy of serious
notice and so utterly beneath scientific investigation as that of the
divining rod.  To most men of science, the reported achievements of the
diviner are on a par with the rogueries of Sir Walter Scott's
'Dousterswivel.'  That anyone with the smallest scientific training
should think it worth his while to devote a considerable amount of time
and labor to an enquiry into the alleged evidence on behalf of the
'rod' will appear to my scientific friends about as sensible as if he
spent his time investigating fortune-telling or any other relic of
superstitious folly.  Nor was my own prejudice against the subject any
less than that of others.  For I confess that it was with great
reluctance, and even repugnance, that some six years ago, yielding to
the earnest request of the Council of the Society for Psychical
Research, I began an investigation of the matter, hoping, however, in
my ignorance, that a few weeks work would enable me to relegate it 'to
a limbo, large and broad, since called the Paradise of Fools.'"  In the
summing-up of his exhaustive investigations, Professor Barrett
committed himself to these conclusions:

"1.  That the twisting of the forked twig, or so-called divining rod,
is due to involuntary muscular action on the part of the dowser.

"2.  That this is the result of an ideo-motor action; any idea or
suggestion, whether conscious, or sub-conscious, that is associated in
the dowser's mind with the twisting of the twig, will cause it to turn
apparently spontaneously in his hands.

"3.  Hence the divining rod has been used in the search for all sorts
of things, from criminals to water, its action being precisely similar
to the '_pendule explorateur_,' i.e., a small suspended ball or ring
depending by a thread from the hand.

"4.  Dismissing, therefore, the mere twisting of the forked rod, the
question at issue is, how is the suggestion derived by the dowser that
starts this involuntary muscular action?  Here the answer is a very
complex and difficult one.

"5.  Careful and critical examination shows that certain dowsers (not
all in whose hands the twig turns) have a genuine facility or faculty
for finding underground water beyond that possessed by ordinary
well-sinkers.

"Part of this success is due (1st) to shrewd observation and the
conscious and unconscious detection of the surface signs of underground
water.  (2nd) A residue, say ten per cent or fifteen per cent of their
successes cannot be so explained, nor can these be accounted for by
chance nor lucky hits, the proportion being larger than the doctrine of
probabilities would account for.

"This residue no known scientific explanation can account for.
Personally, I believe the explanation will be found in some faculty
akin to clairvoyance; but as the science of to-day does not recognize
such a faculty, I prefer to leave the explanation to future inquirers,
and to throw on the skeptic the task of disproving my assertions, and
giving his own explanations."

This unexplained residue, "akin to clairvoyance," as admitted by a
scientist of to-day who wears a top-hat and rides in taxi-cabs, clothes
the divining rod in the same alluring mystery which so puzzled those
childlike and credulous observers of remote and misty centuries.  The
Abbe de Vallemont, writing in 1697, found the problem hardly more
difficult to explain than does this Professor of Experimental Physics
in the Royal College of Science.  The wise men of the seventeenth
century strove hard to comprehend the "unexplained residue," each after
his own fashion.

Michael Mayerus, in his book entitled _Verum Inventum, hoc est, Munera
Germanae_, claimed that the world was indebted to Germany for the
invention of gunpowder, and stated that the first wood-charcoal used in
its manufacture, mixed with sulphur and saltpeter, was made from the
hazel tree.  This lead him to refer to the sympathy existing between
hazel wood and metals, and to add that for this reason the divining rod
was made of this particular wood, which was peculiarly adapted to the
discovery of hidden gold and silver.

Philip Melanchthon, 1497-1560, famously learned in Natural Philosophy
and Theology, discoursed on Sympathy, of which he recognized six
degrees in Nature, and in the second of these he named that sympathy or
affinity which is found to exist between plants and minerals.  He used
as an illustration the forked hazel twig employed by those who search
after gold, silver, and other precious metals.  He attributed the
movement of the rod to the metallic juices which nourish the hazel tree
in the soil, and he was therefore convinced that its peculiar
manifestations were wholly sympathetic and according to natural law.

Neuheusius spoke of the divining rod as a marvel from the bounteous
hands of Nature, and exhorted men to use it in the search for mineral
wealth and concealed treasure.  Enchanted with this
insignificant-looking instrument, he exclaimed: "What shall I say now
concerning the Divine Rod, which is but a simple hazel twig, and yet
possesses the power of divination in the discovery of metals, be that
power derived from mutual sympathy, from some secret astral influence,
or from some still more powerful source.  Let us take courage and use
this salutary rod, so that, after having withdrawn the metals from the
abode of the dead, we may seek in the metals themselves some such
faculty for divination as we find in the hazel."

Rudolph Glauber, who made many experiments with the rod, had this to
say of it: "Metallic veins can also be discovered by means of the hazel
rod.  It is used for that purpose, and I speak after long experience.
Melt the metals under a certain constellation, and make a ball of them
pierced through the middle; thrust into the hole thus formed a young
sprig of hazel, of the same year, with no branches.  Carry this rod
straight in front of you over the places where metals are believed to
be, and when the rod dips and the ball inclines towards the soil, you
may rest assured that metal lies beneath.  _And as this method is based
on natural law, it should undoubtedly be used in preference to any
other_."

Egidius Gustman, supposedly a Rosicrucian friar, and author of a work
entitled _La Revelation de la Divine Majeste_, devoted a chapter to the
study of the question "whether hazel rods may be used without sin in
the search for metals."  He reached the conclusion that there could be
nothing unchristian in their employment for the discovery of gold and
silver, provided neither words, ceremonies, nor enchantments be called
into requisition, and that it be done "in the fear and under the eyes
of God."

M. de Vallemont quotes as his final authority the Abbe Gallet, Grand
Penitentiary of the Church of Carpentras.  He considers that the Abbe's
high position in the church, and his deep knowledge of physics and
mathematics, should lend great weight to his opinion concerning the
divining rod.  He therefore requests a mutual friend to put to the Abbe
this question, "Is not the inclination of the rod due to sleight of
hand or something in which the Devil may play a part?"  The Abbe
returns a long reply in Latin, which de Vallemont is pleased to
translate and print in his book.  It opens thus:

"Monsieur l'Abbe Gallet declares in his own hand that the rod turns in
the direction of water and of metals; that he has used it several times
with admirable success in order to find water-courses and hidden
treasure, and that he is far from agreeing with those who maintain that
there is in it any trickery or diabolical influence."

William Cookworthy, who flourished in England about 1750, was a famous
exponent of the divining rod, and he laid down a most elaborate
schedule of directions for its use in finding hidden treasure or veins
of gold or silver.  In conclusion, he sagely observed:[7]

"I would remark that 'tis plain a person may be very easily deceived in
making experiments with this instrument, there being, in metallic
countries, vast quantities of attracting stones scattered through the
earth.  The attractions of springs continually occurring; and even
about town, bits of iron, pins, etc. may easily be the means of
deceiving the unwary.  For as quantity makes no alteration in the
strength, but only in the wideness of the attraction, a pin under one
foot would stop the attraction of any quantity of every other sort, but
gold, which might be under the other....  Whoever, therefore, will make
experiments need be very cautious in exploring the ground, and be sure
not to be too anxious, for which reason I would advise him, in case of
debates, not to be too warm and lay wagers on the success, but,
unruffled, leave the unbelievers to their infidelity, and permit time
and Providence to convince people of the reality of the thing."

If one would know how to fashion the divining rod to give most surely
the magic results, he has only to consult "The Shepherd's Calendar and
Countryman's Companion" in which it is affirmed:

"Cut a hazel wand forked at the upper end like a Y.  Peel off the rind
and dry it in a moderate heat; then steep it in the juice of wake-robin
or night-shade, and cut the single lower end sharp, and where you
suppose any rich mine or treasure is near, place a piece of the same
metal you conceive is hid in the earth to the tip of one of the forks
by a hair or very fine silk or thread, and do the like to the other
end.  Pitch the sharp single end lightly to the ground at the going
down of the sun, the moon being at the increase, and in the morning at
sunrise, by a natural sympathy, you will find the metal inclining, as
it were, pointing to the place where the other is hid."

According to the author of the modern book, "The Divining Rod and its
Uses,"[8] "it is curious to note that about one hundred years ago there
was considerable excitement in the north of England owing to the
remarkable powers possessed by a lady of quality in the district, this
being no other than Judith Noel, afterwards Lady Milbank, the mother of
Lady Byron.  Miss Noel discovered her marvelous faculty when a mere
girl, yet so afraid was she of being ridiculed that she would not
publicly declare it, thinking she might be called a witch, or that she
would not get a husband.  Lady Milbank afterwards overcame her
prejudice and used the rod on many occasions with considerable success."

About 1880, a certain Madame Caillavah of Paris was at the height of
her fame as a high-priestess of the divining rod, and her pretensions
with respect to finding buried treasure quite set France by the ears.
She was besought to discover, among other hoards, the twelve golden
effigies taken from the Saint Chapelle during the Revolution and hidden
underground for safe-keeping; the treasure of King Stanislaus, buried
outside the gates of Nancy; and the vast accumulations of the Petits
Peres, or Begging Friars.  The French Government took Madame seriously
and permitted her to operate by means of an agreement which should
insure a proper division of the spoils.  There could be no better
authority for the singular exploits of Madame Caillavah than the
columns of _The London Times_ which stated in the issue of October 6th,
1882:

"A certain Madame Caillavah, who in spite of a long experience does not
yet bring the credentials of success, is said to be exploring the
pavement of St. Denis[9] in search of buried treasures.  The French
Government likes partnerships, conventions, and co-dominions, and it
insists on what almost amounts to the lion's share of the spoil.
Nevertheless, a good many people have been found to invest largely in
the enterprise, which will cost something if it comes to actual
digging.  The investigation itself is not in the nature of an
excavation, nor is it with the spade or the pickax, unless, indeed, it
should turn out that it is a veritable gold mine under St. Denis, when
the royal monuments may be thankful if even dynamite be not freely
resorted to.

"The divining rod is to lead the way....  At the beginning of this
century France was one vast field of buried treasure.  The silver coin
was so bulky that L200 of our money would be a hundredweight to carry,
and L1,000 would be a cartload.  So it was buried in the hope of a
speedy return.  The fugitive owners perished or died in exile.  Their
successors on the spot came upon one hoard after another, and said
nothing about it.  That they did find the money and put it in
circulation, there could be no doubt, for it was impossible to take a
handful of silver forty years ago without one or two pieces showing a
green rust in place of a white luster.  This was the result of long
interment, and calculations were made as to the likely total of the
exhumation.

"But one then heard nothing of the divining rod, not at least in
cities, in cathedrals, among the sepulchers of kings, and in the
department of State.  Our first wish is that the experiment may be
quite successful.  It would be so very surprising; quite a new
sensation, much wanted in these days.  But there would be something
more than a passing sensation.  Even a moderate success would discover
to us a means of support and a mode of existence far easier and
pleasanter than any yet known.  We should only have to walk about, very
slowly with the orthodox rod, properly held and handled, keeping our
attention duly fixed on the desirableness of a little more money, and
we should find it springing up, as it were, from the ground before
us....

"The French Minister of Fine Arts need not be deterred,--nay, it is
plain he is not deterred,--by the scruples that interrupted the
investigations of the great Linne and stopped him on the very threshold
of verification.  On one of his travels his secretary brought him a
divining wand, with an account of its powers.  Linne hid a purse
containing one hundred ducats under a _ranunculus_[10] in the garden.
He then took a number of witnesses who experimented with the wand all
over the ground, but without success.  Indeed, they trod the ground so
completely that Linne could not find where he had buried the purse.

"They then brought in the 'man with the wand' and he immediately
pointed out the right direction, and then the very spot where the money
lay.  Linne's remark was that another experiment would convert him to
the wand.  But he resolved not to be converted, and therefore did not
repeat the experiment.  Possibly feeling that it was neither science
nor religion, he would have nothing to do with any other conceivable
alternative."

In _The London Times_ of November 3rd, 1882, there was published under
the head of "Foreign Intelligence," the following dispatch which may be
regarded as a tragic sequel of the foregoing paragraphs:

"The titular Archbishop of Lepanto, who is the head of the Chapter of
St. Denis, has addressed a remonstrance to the Government against the
renewed divining rod experiments on which Madame Caillavah is insisting
under her compact with the State for a division of the spoils.  He
dwells on the absurdity of the theory that on the Revolutionary seizure
of 1793 the Benedictines could have concealed a portion of their
treasures, of which printed lists existed and the most valuable of
which were notoriously confiscated.

"As to the notion of an earlier secretion of treasures, the memory of
which had perished, he urges that St. Denis having belonged to the
Benedictines from its very erection, no motive for secretion existed
and had there been any, the tradition or record of it would have been
preserved, while at least four successive reconstructions would
certainly have brought any such treasure to light.  The mob of 1793,
moreover, actually ransacked the vaults, after the removal of the
bodies, for the very purpose of discovering such secret hoards.  St.
Denis, in short, is the very last place in the world for
treasure-trove, and as for the central crypt, which the sorceress
claims to break into, it was rifled in 1793 when it contained
fifty-three bodies which left no vacant space.

"The Archbishop need scarcely have troubled himself with this
demonstration.  Public ridicule has made an end of the project, and
even if Madame Caillavah carried out her threat of a lawsuit, no
tribunal would hold her entitled to carry on excavations _ad libitum_,
with a risk, perhaps, of herself and her workmen being buried under the
ruins of the finest of French cathedrals.  In debating the Fine Arts
Department estimates, M. Delattre, Deputy for St. Denis, animadverted
on the divining rod experiments in the cathedral.  M. Tirard replied
that the Government had had no share in this ridiculous business.  The
treaty with the sorceress was concluded in January, 1881, by an
official who had since been superannuated, but was not acted upon till
she could deposit two hundred francs guarantee, and as soon as he
himself heard of the experiments he put a peremptory stop to them.

"It is important here to observe that it afterwards transpired that the
object of Madame Caillavah's lawsuit was not so much to obtain damages
for any breach of contract as to vindicate her private and public
character and her professional reputation as a so-called 'diviner' from
the odium, scorn, and defamation which the repudiation of the treaty so
universally entailed.  The sad result of all this was that the
unfortunate and sensitive lady was not able to withstand the opprobrium
that was heaped upon her, nor 'the ridicule that made an end of her
project.'  This maligned and misunderstood lady (who, as expressly
stated, 'had no doubt brought a good pedigree with her') after a few
months of sorrow, and conscious of her rectitude, at length succumbed
and, as reported, ultimately died of a 'broken heart.'"



[1] "_Corpuscular philosophy_, that which attempts to account for the
phenomena of nature, by the motion, figure, rest, position, etc., of
the minute particles of matter."--_Webster's Dictionary_.

[2] Andrew Lang writes in a chapter on the divining rod in _Custom and
Myth_:

"The great authority for the modern history of the divining rod is a
work published by M. Chevreul in Paris in 1854.  M. Chevreul, probably
with truth, regarded the wand as much on a par with the turning tables
which, in 1854, attracted a good deal of attention....  M. Chevreul
could find no earlier book on the twig than the _Testament du Frere_,
Basile Valentin, a holy man who flourished (the twig) about 1413, but
whose treatise is possibly apocryphal.  According to Basile Valentin,
the twig was regarded with awe by ignorant laboring men, which is still
true."

[3] "And Jacob took him rods of green poplar, and of the hazel and
chestnut tree; and pilled white strakes in them, and made the white
appear which was in the rods.

"And he set the rods which he had pilled before the flocks in the
gutters in the watering troughs when the flocks came to drink, that
they should conceive when they came to drink."  (Genesis xxx, 37-38.)

"And the Lord said unto Moses, Go on before the people, and take with
thee of the elders of Israel; and thy rod, wherewith thou smotest the
river, take in thy hand, and go.

"Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock in Horeb; and
thou shalt smite the rock, and there shall come water out of it, that
the people may drink.  And Moses did so in the sight of the elders of
Israel."  (Exodus xvii, 5-6.)

[4] Goclenius was a diviner who also professed to make "magnetic cures."

[5] See chapter 9, p. 218.

[6] Quoted from the volume, _Water Divining_ (London, 1902).

[7] The Gentleman's Magazine (London, 1752).

[8] By Young and Robertson (London, 1894).

[9] For centuries the home of the Benedictine Order.

[10] In plain English, flowers of the buttercup family.




CHAPTER XV

SUNDRY PIRATES AND THEIR BOOTY

  "Seven years were gone and over, Wild Roger came again,
  He spoke of forays and of frays upon the Spanish Main,
  And he had stores of gold galore, and silks and satins fine,
  And flasks and casks of Malvoisie, and precious Gascon wine;
  Rich booties had he brought, he said, across the Western wave.
  But Roger was the same man still,--he scorned his brother's prayers--
  He called his crew, away he flew, and on those foreign shores,
  Got killed in some outlandish place,--they called it the Eyesores."
          (_Ingoldsby Legends._)


The popular delusion that pirates found nothing better to do with their
plunder than to bury it, like so many thrifty depositors in savings
banks, clashes with what is known of the habits and temperaments of
many of the most industrious rovers under the black flag.  By way of a
concluding survey of the matter, let us briefly examine the careers of
divers pirates of sorts and try to ascertain what they did with their
gold and whether it be plausible to assume that they had any of it left
to bury.  Of course, romance and legend are up in arms at the
presumption that any well-regulated and orthodox pirate omitted the
business with the pick and shovel and the chart with the significant
crosses and compass bearings, but the prosaic facts of history are due
to have their innings.

For example, there was Jean Lafitte who amassed great riches in the
pursuit of his profession and whose memory has inspired innumerable
treasure-seeking expeditions in the Gulf of Mexico and along the coast
of Central America.  After ravaging the commerce of the East India
Company in the waters of the Far East, he set up his headquarters on an
island among the bayous and cypress swamps of that desolate region
below New Orleans that is known as Barrataria.  A deep-water pass ran
to the open sea, only two leagues distant, and on the shores of the
sheltered harbor of Grand Terre, Lafitte organized the activities of a
large number of pirates and smugglers and formed a flourishing colony;
a corporation, in its way, for disposing of the merchandise filched
from honest shipping.  These marauders posed as privateers, and some of
them had French and other commissions for sailing against the Spanish,
but there was a great deal of laxity in such trifles as living up to
the letter of the law.

At Grand Terre, Lafitte and his people sold the cargoes of their prizes
by public auction, and from all parts of lower Louisiana
bargain-hunters flocked to Barrataria to deal in this tempting traffic.
The goods thus purchased were smuggled into New Orleans and other
nearby ports, and Lafitte's piratical enterprises became so notorious
that the government of the United States sent an expedition against him
in 1814, commanded by Commodore Patterson.  At Grand Terre he found a
settlement so great in force and numbers as to constitute a small
kingdom ruled by Lafitte.  The commodore described the encounter in a
letter to the Secretary of War, and said in part:

"At half-past eight o'clock A.M. on the 16th of June, made the Island
of Barrataria, and discovered a number of vessels in the harbor some of
which showed the colors of Carthagena.  At two o'clock, perceived the
pirates forming their vessels, ten in number, including prizes, into a
line of battle near the entrance of the harbor, and making every
preparation to offer battle.  At ten o'clock, wind light and variable,
formed the order of battle with six gun boats and the _Sea Horse_
tender, mounting one six pounder and fifteen men, and a launch mounting
one twelve pound carronade; the schooner _Carolina_ drawing too much
water to cross the bar.

"At half-past ten o'clock, perceived several smokes along the coasts as
signals, and at the same time a white flag hoisted on board a schooner
at the fort, an American flag at the mainmast head, and a Carthagenian
flag (under which the pirates cruise) at her topping-lift.  I replied
with a white flag at my main.  At eleven o'clock discovered that the
pirates had fired two of their best schooners; hauled down my white
flag and made the signal for battle; hoisting a large flag bearing the
words _Pardon for Deserters_, having heard there was a number on shore
from our army and navy.  At a quarter past eleven o'clock, two
gun-boats grounded, and were passed, agreeably to my previous orders,
by the other four which entered the harbor, manned by my barge and the
boats belonging to the grounded vessels, and proceeded in.  To my great
disappointment, I perceived that the pirates had abandoned their
vessels and were flying in all directions.  I immediately sent the
launch and two barges with small boats in pursuit of them.

"At meridian, took possession of all their vessels in the harbor,
consisting of six schooners and one felucca, cruisers and prizes of the
pirates, one brig, a prize, and two armed schooners under the
Carthagenian flag, both in the line of battle with the armed vessels of
the pirates, and apparently with an intention to aid them in any
resistance they might make against me, as their crews were at quarters,
tompions out of their guns, and matches lighted.  Colonel Ross (with
seventy-five infantry) at the same time landed and took possession of
their establishment on shore, consisting of about forty houses of
different sizes, badly constructed and thatched with palmetto leaves.

"When I perceived the enemy forming their vessels into a line of
battle, I felt confident from their number, and very advantageous
position, and their number of men, that they would have fought me.
Their not doing so I regret, for had they, I should have been able more
effectually to destroy or make prisoners of them and their leaders.
The enemy had mounted on their vessels twenty pieces of cannon of
different caliber, and as I have since learned, had from eight hundred
to one thousand men of all nations and colors."

Notwithstanding this unfriendly visit, Lafitte was a patriot after his
own fashion and during the War of 1812 his sympathies were with the
American forces.  In September, 1814, Captain Lockyer, of a British
naval vessel, anchored in the pass at Barrataria, and delivered to
Lafitte a packet of documents comprising a proclamation addressed to
the inhabitants of Louisiana by Colonel Edward Nichalls, commander of
the English forces on the coast of Florida, a letter from him to
Lafitte, and another from the Honorable W. H. Percy, captain of the
sloop-of-war _Hermes_.  The upshot of all this was a proposal that
Lafitte enter the British naval service in command of a frigate, and if
he would take his men with him he should have thirty thousand dollars,
payable at Pensacola.

Lafitte refused the tempting bait, and two days later sent the
following letter to Governor Claiborne of the state of Louisiana:


BARRATARIA, Sept. 4th. 1814.

"_Sir:_

"In the firm persuasion that the choice made of you to fill the office
of first magistrate of this state, was dictated by the esteem of your
fellow citizens, and was conferred on merit, I confidently address you
on an affair on which may depend the safety of this country.  I offer
to restore to this state several citizens who perhaps in your eyes have
lost that sacred title.  I offer you them, however, such as you could
wish to find them, ready to exert their utmost efforts in defense of
the country.  This point of Louisiana which I occupy is of great
importance in the present crisis.  I tender my services to defend it;
and the only reward I ask is that a stop be put to the proscription
against me and my adherents, by an act of oblivion, for all that has
been done hitherto.  I am the stray sheep wishing to return to the
fold.  If you are thoroughly acquainted with the nature of my offenses,
I shall appear to you much less guilty, and still worthy to discharge
the duties of a good citizen.  I have never sailed under any flag but
that of the republic of Carthagena, and my vessels are perfectly
regular in that respect.  If I could have brought my lawful prizes into
the ports of this state, I should not have employed the illicit means
that have caused me to be proscribed.  I decline saying more on the
subject, until I have the honor of your Excellency's answer, which I am
persuaded can be dictated only by wisdom.  Should your answer not be
favorable to my desires, I declare to you that I will instantly leave
the country, to avoid the imputation of having cooperated towards an
invasion of this point, which cannot fail to take place, and to rest
secure in the acquittal of my conscience.

"I have the honor to be
    "Your Excellency's, etc.
        "J. LAFITTE."


This highly commendable document so favorably impressed Governor
Claiborne that he offered Lafitte safe conduct to come to New Orleans
and meet General Andrew Jackson.  After a conference of this trio, the
following order was issued:

"The Governor of Louisiana, being informed that many individuals
implicated in the offenses heretofore committed against the United
States at Barrataria, express a willingness at the present crisis to
enroll themselves and march against the enemy:

"He does hereby invite them to join the standard of the United States
and is authorized to say, should their conduct in the field meet the
approbation of the Major General, that that officer will unite with the
Governor in a request to the President of the United States, to extend
to each and every individual so marching and acting, a free and full
pardon."

At the battle of New Orleans, on January 8th, 1815, Lafitte and his
lieutenant, Dominique, commanded a large force of what Jackson called
the "Corsairs of Barrataria," and defended their breastworks and served
their batteries with such desperate gallantry that they nobly earned
the promised pardons.  These were granted by President James Madison on
February 6th, and he took occasion to say:

"But it has since been represented that the offenders have manifested a
sincere repentance; that they have abandoned the prosecution of the
worst cause for the support of the best, and particularly, that they
have exhibited in the defense of New Orleans, unequivocal traits of
courage and fidelity.  Offenders, who have refused to become the
associates of the enemy in the war, upon the most seductive terms of
invitation; and who have aided to repel his hostile invasion of the
territory of the United States, can no longer be considered as objects
of punishment, but as objects of a generous forgiveness."

The foregoing evidence is ample to prove that Lafitte had no occasion
to bury any of his treasure, but like Kidd along the New England coast,
legend has been busy with his name and is blind to the facts of record.
He later made a settlement on the island of Galveston and his history
becomes obscured.  One version is that the love of the old trade was in
his blood, and he fitted out a large privateer to have a farewell fling
with fortune.  A British sloop-of-war overhauled him in the Gulf of
Mexico, hailed him as a pirate, and opened fire.  The engagement was
terrifically hot, and Jean Lafitte was killed at the head of his men
while resisting a boarding party.

Take next the case of that noted pirate Captain Avery "whose adventures
were the subject of general conversation in Europe."  He captured one
of the Great Mogul's ships laden with treasure; it was reported that he
had wedded a daughter of that magnificent ruler and was about to found
a new monarchy; that he gave commissions in his own name to the
captains of his ships and the commanders of his forces and was
acknowledged by them as their prince.  With sixteen stout fellows of
his own kidney, he ran off with a ship in which he had sailed from
England as mate, and steered for Madagascar in the year 1715.  "The
Pirates' Own Book" tells the story of Captain Avery, his treasure, and
the melancholy fate of both, and the author is, as a rule, such a
well-informed historian of these matters, that he should be allowed to
set it forth in his own words, which are framed in a style admirably
befitting the theme.

"Near the river Indus the man at the mast-head espied a sail upon which
they gave chase; as they came nearer to her they discovered that she
was a tall vessel, and might turn out to be an East Indiaman.  She,
however, proved a better prize; for when they fired at her, she hoisted
Mogul colors, and seemed to stand upon her defense.  Avery only
cannonaded at a distance, when some of the men began to suspect he was
not the hero they had supposed.  His sloops, however, attacked, the one
on the bow, and another upon the quarter of the ship, and so boarded
her.  She then struck her colors.  She was one of the Great Mogul's own
ships, and there were in her several of the greatest persons in his
court, among whom, it was said, was one of his daughters going upon a
pilgrimage to Mecca; and they were carrying with them rich offerings to
present at the shrine of Mahomet.  It is a well-known fact that the
people of the East travel with great magnificence, so that these had
along with them all their slaves and attendants, with a large quantity
of vessels of gold and silver, and immense sums of money to defray
their expenses by land.  The spoil, therefore, which they received from
that ship was almost incalculable.

"Our adventurers made the best of their way back to Madagascar,
intending to make that place the deposit of all their treasure, to
build a small fort, and to keep always a few men there for its
protection.  Avery, however, disconcerted this plan, and rendered it
altogether unnecessary.  While steering their course, he sent a boat to
each of the sloops, requesting that the chiefs would come on board his
ship to hold a conference.  He suggested to them the necessity of
securing the property which they had acquired, and observed that the
main difficulty was to get it safe on shore; adding that if either of
the sloops should be attacked alone, they would not be able to make any
great resistance.  That, for his part, his ship was so strong, so well
manned, and such a swift-sailing vessel, that he did not think it
possible for any other ship to take or overcome her.  Accordingly, he
proposed that all their treasure should be sealed up in three
chests,--that each of the captains should have a key, and that they
should not be opened until all were present;--that the chests should be
then put on board his ship and afterwards lodged in some safe place on
land.

"This proposal seemed so reasonable, and so much for the common good
that it was agreed to without hesitation, and all the treasure was
deposited in three chests and carried to Avery's ship.  The weather
being favorable, they remained all three in company during that and the
next day; meanwhile Avery, tampering with his men, suggested that they
had now on board what was sufficient to make them all happy; 'and
what,' continued he, 'should hinder us from going to some country where
we are not known, and living on shore all the rest of our days in
plenty!'  They soon understood his hint, and all readily consented to
deceive the men of the sloops, and fly with all the booty.  This they
effected during the darkness of the following night.  The reader may
easily conjecture what were the feelings and indignation of the other
two crews in the morning when they discovered that Avery had made off
with all their property.

"Avery and his men hastened towards America, and being strangers in
that country, agreed to divide the booty, to change their names, and
each separately to take up his residence and live in affluence and
honor....  Avery had been careful to conceal the greater part of the
jewels and other valuable articles, so that his own riches were
immense.  Arriving at Boston, he was almost resolved to settle there,
but as the greater part of his wealth consisted of diamonds, he was
apprehensive that he could not dispose of them at that place, without
being taken up as a pirate.  Upon reflection, therefore, he resolved to
sail for Ireland, and in a short time arrived in the northern part of
that kingdom, and his men dispersed into several places.  Some of them
obtained the pardon of King William and settled in that country.

"The wealth of Avery, however, now proved of small service and
occasioned him great uneasiness.  He could not offer his diamonds for
sale in that country without being suspected.  Considering, therefore,
what was best to be done, he thought there might be some person in
Bristol he could venture to trust.  Upon this he resolved, and going to
Devonshire, sent to one of his friends to meet him at a town called
Bideford.  When he had unbosomed himself to him and other pretended
friends, they agreed that the safest plan was to put his effects in the
hands of some wealthy merchants, and no inquiry would be made how they
came by them.

"One of these friends told him he was acquainted with some who were
very fit for the purpose, and if he would allow them a handsome
commission, they would do the business faithfully.  Avery liked the
proposal, particularly as he could think of no other way of managing
this matter, since he could not appear to act for himself.
Accordingly, the merchants paid Avery a visit at Bideford, where after
strong protestations of honor and integrity, he delivered them his
effects, consisting of diamonds and some vessels of gold.  After giving
him a little money for his present subsistence, they departed.

"He changed his name and lived quietly at Bideford, so that no notice
was taken of him.  In a short time his money was all spent, and he
heard nothing from his merchants though he wrote to them repeatedly.
At last they sent him a small supply, but it was not sufficient to pay
his debts.  In short, the remittances they sent him were so trifling
that he could with difficulty exist.  He therefore determined to go
privately to Bristol, and have an interview with the merchants
himself,--where instead of money, he met with a mortifying repulse.
For when he desired them to come to an account with him, they silenced
him by threatening to disclose his character; the merchants thus
proving themselves as good pirates on land as he was at sea.

"Whether he was frightened by these menaces, or had seen some other
person who recognized him, is not known.  However, he went immediately
to Ireland, and from thence solicited his merchants very strongly for a
supply, but to no purpose; so that he was reduced to beggary.  In this
extremity he was determined to return and cast himself upon the mercy
of these honest Bristol merchants, let the consequence be what it
would.  He went on board a trading vessel, and worked his passage over
to Plymouth, from whence he traveled on foot to Bideford.  He had been
there but a few days when he fell sick and died; not being worth so
much as would buy a coffin."

That very atrocious pirate, Charles Gibbs, squandered most of his
treasure, but it may be some consolation to know that $20,000 of it, in
silver coin, was buried on the beach of Long Island, a few miles from
Southampton, as attested by the records of the United States Court of
the Southern District of New York.  Captain Gibbs was a thoroughly bad
egg, from first to last, and quite modern, it is interesting to note,
for he was hanged as recently as 1831.  He was born in Rhode Island,
raised on a farm, and ran away to sea in the navy.  It is to his credit
that he is said to have served on board the _Chesapeake_ in her famous
battle with the _Shannon_, but after his release from Dartmoor as a
British prisoner of war, he fell from grace and opened a grogery in Ann
Street, called the Tin Pot, "a place full of abandoned women and
dissolute fellows."  He drank up all the profits, so went to sea again
and found a berth in a South American privateer.  Leading a mutiny, he
gained the ship and made a pirate of her, frequenting Havana, and
plundering merchant vessels along the Cuban coast.  He slaughtered
their crews in cold blood and earned an infamous reputation for
cruelty.  In his confession written while he was under sentence of
death in New York, he stated "that some time in the course of the year
1819, he left Havana and came to the United States, bringing with him
about $30,000 in gold.  He passed several weeks in the city of New
York, and then went to Boston, whence he took passage for Liverpool in
the ship _Emerald_.  Before he sailed, however, he had squandered a
large amount of his money by dissipation and gambling.  He remained in
Liverpool a few months, and then returned to Boston.  His residence in
Liverpool at that time is satisfactorily ascertained from another
source beside his own confession.  A female now in New York was well
acquainted with him there, where, she says, he lived like a gentleman,
apparently with abundant means of support.  In speaking of his
acquaintance with this female, he says, 'I fell in with a woman who I
thought was all virtue, but she deceived me, and I am sorry to say that
a heart that never felt abashed at scenes of carnage and blood, was
made a child of for a time by her, and I gave way to dissipation to
drown the torment.  How often when the fumes of liquor have subsided
have I thought of my good and affectionate parents, and of their
Godlike advice!  My friends advised me to behave myself like a man, and
promised me their assistance, but the demon still haunted me, and I
spurned their advice.'"[1]

After the adventure with the deceitful female, Gibbs was not as
successful as formerly in his profession of piracy, and appears to have
lost his grip.  For several years he knocked about the Seven Seas, in
one sort of shady escapade or another, but he flung away whatever gold
he harvested and was driven to commit the sordid crime which brought
him to the gallows.  In November of 1830, he shipped as a seaman in the
brig _Vineyard_, Captain William Thornby, from New Orleans to
Philadelphia with a cargo of cotton and molasses, and $54,000 in
specie.  Learning of the money on board, Gibbs cooked up a conspiracy
to kill the captain and the mate and persuaded Thomas Wansley, the
steward, to help him put them out of the way.  According to the
testimony, others of the crew were implicated, but the court convicted
only these two.  The sworn statement of Seaman Robert Dawes is as
red-handed a treasure story as could be imagined:

"When about five days out, I was told that there was money on board.
Charles Gibbs, E. Church, and the steward then determined to take
possession of the brig.  They asked James Talbot, another member of the
crew, to join them.  He said no, as he did not believe there was money
in the vessel.  They concluded to kill the captain and mate, and if
Talbot and John Brownrigg would not join them, to kill them also.  The
next night they talked of doing it, and got their clubs ready.  I dared
not say a word, as they declared they would kill me if I did.  As they
did not agree about killing Talbot and Brownrigg, their two shipmates,
it was put off.  They next concluded to kill the captain and mate on
the night of November 22nd but did not get ready; but on the night of
the 23rd, between twelve and one o 'clock, when I was at the helm, the
steward came up with a light and a knife in his hand.  He dropped the
light and seizing the pump-break, struck the captain with it over the
head or back of the neck.  The captain was sent forward by the blow and
halloed, 'Oh' and 'Murder' once.

"He was then seized by Gibbs and the cook, one by the head and the
other by the heels and thrown overboard.  Atwell and Church stood at
the companion way, to strike down the mate when he should come up.  As
he came up and enquired what was the matter, they struck him over the
head,--he ran back into the cabin, and Charles Gibbs followed him down;
but as it was dark, he could not find him.  Gibbs then came on deck for
the light with which he returned below.  I left the helm to see what
was going on in the cabin.  Gibbs found the mate and seized him, while
Atwell and Church came down and struck him with a pump break and club.

"The mate was then dragged upon deck.  They called for me to help them
and as I came up, the mate seized my hand and gave me a death grip.
Three of them hove him overboard, but which three I do not know.  The
mate was not dead when cast overboard, but called after us twice while
in the water.  I was so frightened that I hardly knew what to do.  They
then asked me to call Talbot, who was in the forecastle saying his
prayers.  He came up and said it would be his turn next, but they gave
him some grog and told him not to be afraid, as they would not hurt
him.  If he was true to them, he should fare as well as they did.  One
of those who had been engaged in the bloody deed got drunk and another
became crazy.

"After killing the captain and mate they set about overhauling the
vessel, and got up one keg of Mexican dollars.  Then they divided the
captain's clothes and money,--about forty dollars and a gold watch.
Talbot, Brownrigg and I, who were all innocent men, were obliged to do
as we were commanded.  I was sent to the helm and ordered to steer for
Long Island.  On the day following, they divided several kegs of the
specie, amounting to five thousand dollars each, and made bags and
sewed the money up.  After this division, they divided the rest of the
money without counting it.

"On Sunday, when about fifteen miles S.S.E. of Southampton Light, they
got the boats out and put half the money in each, and then they
scuttled the vessel and set fire to it in the cabin, and took to the
boats.  Gibbs, after the murder, took charge of the vessel as captain.
From the papers on board, we learned that the money belonged to Stephen
Girard.[2]

"With the boats we made the land about daylight.  I was in the
long-boat with three others.  The rest with Atwell were in the
jolly-boat.  On coming to the bar the boats stuck, and we threw
overboard a great deal of money, in all about five thousand dollars.
The jolly-boat foundered.  We saw it fill and heard them cry out, and
saw them clinging to the masts.  We went ashore on Barron Island, and
buried the money in the sand, but very lightly.  Soon after, we met
with a gunner, whom we requested to conduct us where we could get some
refreshments.  They were by him conducted to Johnson's (the only man
living on the island) where we stayed all night.  I went to bed about
ten o'clock.  Jack Brownrigg sat up with Johnson, and in the morning
told me that he had told Johnson all about the murders.  Johnson went
in the morning with the steward for the clothes, which were left on the
top of the place where they buried the money, but I don't believe they
took away the money."

Here was genuine buried treasure, but the circumstances were such as to
make the once terrible Captain Charles Gibbs cut a wretched figure.  To
the ignominious crime of killing the captain and the mate of a little
trading brig had descended this freebooter of renown who had numbered
his prizes by the score and boasted of slaying their crews wholesale.
As for the specie looted from the brig _Vineyard_, half the amount was
lost in the surf when the jolly-boat foundered, and the remainder
buried where doubtless that hospitable resident, Johnson, was able to
find most of it.  Silver dollars were too heavy to be carried away in
bulk by stranded pirates, fleeing the law, and these rascals got no
good of their plunder.

======================================================================

[Illustration: Gibbs and Wansley burying the treasure.]

The Portugese captain cutting away the bag of moidores.

(_From The Pirates' Own Book._)

======================================================================

Glance at the sin-stained roster of famous pirates, Edward Low, Captain
England, Captain Thomas White, Benito De Soto, Captain Roberts, Captain
John Rackham, Captain Thomas Tew, and most of the bloody crew, and it
will be found that either they wasted their treasure in debaucheries,
or were hanged, shot, or drowned with empty pockets.  Of them all,
Blackbeard[3] fills the eye most struttingly as the proper pirate to
have buried treasure.  He was immensely theatrical, fond of playing the
part right up to the hilt, and we may rest assured that unless his
sudden taking-off prevented, he was at pains to bury at least one
sea-chest full of treasure in order to live up to the best traditions
of his calling.  He was prosperous, and unlike most of his lesser
brethren, suffered no low tides of fortune.  By rights, he should be a
far more famous character than Captain William Kidd whose commonplace
career was so signally devoid of purple patches.  Blackbeard was a
pirate "right out of a book," as the saying is.  How this Captain
Edward Teach swaggered through the streets of Charleston and terrorized
the Carolinas and Bermuda is an old story, as is also the thrilling
narrative of his capture, after a desperate battle, by brave Lieutenant
Maynard, who hung the pirate's head from his bowsprit and sailed home
in triumph.  There are touches here and there, however, in the
authentic biography of Blackbeard which seem to belong in a discussion
of buried treasure, for he was so very much the kind of flamboyant
rogue that legend paints as infernally busy with pick and shovel on
dark and lonely beaches.

Blackbeard is the hero of such extremely diverting tales as these,
which sundry writers have not scrupled to appropriate, either for
purposes of fiction or unblushingly to fit them to poor Captain Kidd as
chronicles of fact:

"In the commonwealth of pirates, he who goes the greatest length of
wickedness is looked upon with a kind of envy amongst them, as a person
of a most extraordinary gallantry.  He is therefore entitled to be
distinguished by some post, and if such a one has but courage, he must
certainly be a great man.  The hero of whom we are writing was
thoroughly accomplished in this way, and some of his frolics of
wickedness were as extravagant as if he aimed at making his men believe
he was a devil incarnate.  Being one day, at sea, and a little flushed
with drink; 'Come,' said he, 'let us make a hell of our own, and try
how long we can bear it.'  Accordingly he, with two or three others,
went down into the hold, and closing up all the hatches, filled several
pots full of brimstone, and other combustible matter.  They then set it
on fire, and so continued till they were almost suffocated, when some
of the men cried out for air.  At length he opened the hatches, not a
little pleased that he had held out the longest.

"One night, Blackbeard, drinking in his cabin with Israel Hands,[4] and
the pilot, and another man, without any pretense took a small pair of
pistols, and cocked them under the table.  Which being perceived by the
man, he went on deck, leaving the captain, Hands, and the pilot
together.  When his pistols were prepared, he extinguished the candle,
crossed his arms and fired at the company, under the table.  The one
pistol did no execution, but the other wounded Hands in the knee.
Interrogated concerning the meaning of this, he answered with an
imprecation, 'That if he did not now and then kill one of them, they
would forget who he was.'"

"In Blackbeard's journal, which was taken, there were several memoranda
of the following nature, all written with his own hand.--'Such a day,
rum all out;--our company somewhat sober;--a damned confusion amongst
us! rogues a-plotting;--great talk of separation;--so I looked sharp
for a prize; such a day took one with a great deal of liquor on board;
so kept the company hot, damned hot, then all things went well again.'"

"Blackbeard derived his name from his long black beard, which, like a
frightful meteor, covered his whole face, and terrified all America
more than any comet that has ever appeared.  He was accustomed to twist
it with ribbon in small quantities, and turn them about his ears.  In
time of action he wore a sling over his shoulder with three braces of
pistols.  He stuck lighted matches under his hat, which appearing on
both sides of his face and eyes, naturally fierce and wild, made him
such a figure that the human imagination cannot form a conception of a
fury more terrible and alarming."[5]

In the best account of his melodramatic exit from the life which he had
adorned with so much distinction, there is a reference to buried
treasure that must be set down as a classic of its kind.

"Upon the 17th of November, 1717, Lieutenant Maynard left James's River
in quest of Blackbeard, and on the evening of the 21st came in sight of
the pirate.  This expedition was fitted out with all possible secrecy,
no boat being permitted to pass that might convey any intelligence,
while care was taken to discover where the pirates were lurking....
The hardened and infatuated pirate, having been often deceived by false
intelligence, was the less attentive, nor was he convinced of his
danger until he saw the sloops sent to apprehend him.  Though he had
then only twenty men on board, he prepared to give battle.  Lieutenant
Maynard arrived with his sloops in the evening and anchored, as he
could not venture, under cloud of night, to go into the place where
Blackbeard lay.

"The latter spent the night in drinking with the master of a trading
vessel, with the same indifference as if no danger had been near.  Nay,
such was the desperate wickedness of this villain, that, it is
reported, during the carousals of that night, one of his men asked him,
'In case anything should happen to him during the engagement with the
two sloops which were waiting to attack him in the morning, whether his
wife knew where he had buried his money!'  To this he impiously
replied, 'That nobody but himself and the devil knew where it was, and
the longest liver should take all.'

======================================================================

[Illustration: Interview between Lafitte, General Andrew Jackson, and
Governor Claiborne.]

The death of Black Beard.

(_From The Pirates' Own Book._)

======================================================================

"In the morning Maynard weighed, and sent his boat to take soundings,
which, coming near the pirate, received her fire.  Maynard then hoisted
royal colors, and directly toward Blackbeard with every sail and oar.
In a little while the pirate ran aground, and so did the king's
vessels.  Maynard lightened his vessel of the ballast and water and
made towards Blackbeard.  Upon this, the pirate hailed in his own rude
style.  'Damn you for villains, who are you, and from whence come you?'
The lieutenant answered, 'You may see from our colors we are no
pirates.'  Blackbeard bade him send his boat on board, that he might
see who he was.  But Maynard replied, 'I cannot spare my boat, but I
will come on board of you as soon as I can with my sloop.'  Upon this
Blackbeard took a glass of liquor and drank to him, saying, 'I'll give
no quarter nor take any from you.'  Maynard replied, 'He expected no
quarter from him, nor should he take any.'"[6]

It is to be presumed that the devil fell heir to Blackbeard's treasure,
inasmuch as Lieutenant Maynard and his men fairly cut the pirate and
his crew to pieces.  Turn we now from such marauders as this to that
greater generation of buccaneers, so called, who harried the Spanish
treasure fleets and towns in the West Indies and on the coasts of the
Isthmus and South and Central America.  During the period when Port
Royal, Jamaica, was the headquarters and recruiting station for these
picturesque cut-throats, and Sir Henry Morgan was their bright,
particular star, there is the testimony of an eye-witness and
participant to show that the blood-stained gold seldom tarried long
enough with its owners to permit of burying it, and that they bothered
their wicked heads very little about safeguarding the future.

Captain Bartholomew Roberts, that "tall, black man, nearly forty years
old, whose favorite toast was 'Damnation to him who ever lives to wear
a halter,'" was snuffed out in an action with a King's ship, and the
manner of his life and melodramatic quality of his death suggest that
he be mentioned herein as worthy of a place beside Blackbeard himself.
Roberts has been overlooked by buried treasure legend, and this is odd,
for he was a figure to inspire such tales.  His flamboyant career
opened in 1719 and was successful until the British man-of-war
_Swallow_ overhauled him on the African coast.  His biographer, Captain
Charles Johnson, writing while the episode was less than a decade old
and when the facts were readily obtainable, left us this fine picture
of the fight:

"Roberts himself made a gallant figure at the time of the engagement,
being dressed in a rich crimson damask waistcoat and breeches, a red
feather in his hat, a gold chain round his neck, with a diamond cross
hanging to it, a sword in his hand, and two pair of pistols hanging at
the end of a silk sling flung over his shoulder (according to the
fashion of the pirates).  He is said to have given his orders with
boldness and spirit; coming, according to what he had purposed, close
to the man of war, received her fire, and then hoisted his black
flag[7] and returned it; shooting away from her with all the sail he
could pack....  But keeping his tacks down, either by the wind's
shifting or ill steerage, or both, he was taken aback with his sails,
and the _Swallow_ came a second time very nigh to him.  He had now
perhaps finished the fight very desperately if Death, who took a swift
passage in a grapeshot, had not interposed and struck him directly on
the throat.

"He settled himself on the tackles of a gun, which one Stephenson from
the helm, observing, ran to his assistance, and not perceiving him
wounded, swore at him and bid him stand up like a man.  But when he
found his mistake, and that Captain Roberts was certainly dead, he
gushed into tears and wished the next shot might be his lot.  They
presently threw him overboard, with his arms and ornaments on,
according to the repeated requests he had made in his life."

There was no treasure for the stout-hearted scoundrels who were
captured by the _Swallow_.  They had diced with fortune and lost, and
Execution Dock was waiting for them, but they are worth a passing
acquaintance and it gives one a certain satisfaction to learn that
"they were impudently merry, saying when they viewed their nakedness,
'That they had not one half penny left to give old Charon to ferry them
over the Styx,' and at their thin commons they would observe that they
fell away so fast that they should not have weight enough to hang them.
Sutton used to be very profane, and he happening to be in the same
irons with another prisoner who was more serious than ordinary and read
and prayed often, as became his condition, this man Sutton used to
swear and ask him, 'What he proposed by so much noise and devotion?'
'Heaven, I hope,' says the other.  'Heaven, you fool,' says Sutton,
'Did you ever hear of any pirate going thither?  Give me Hell.  It is a
merrier place.  I'll give Roberts a salute of thirteen guns at
entrance.'"

After Morgan had sacked the rich city of Porto Bello, John Esquemeling
wrote of the expedition:[8]

"With these (ships) he arrived in a few days at the Island of Cuba,
where he sought out a place wherein with all quiet and repose he might
make the dividend of the spoil they had got.  They found in ready money
two hundred and fifty thousand pieces of eight, besides all other
merchandises, as cloth, linen, silks, and other goods.  With this rich
booty they sailed again thence to their common place of rendezvous,
Jamaica.  Being arrived, they passed here some time in all sorts of
vices and debauchery, according to their common manner of doing,
spending with huge prodigality what others had gained with no small
labor and toil."

"... Such of these Pirates are found who will spend two or three
thousand pieces of eight in one night, not leaving themselves,
peradventure, a good shirt to wear on their backs in the morning.  My
own master would buy, on like occasions, a whole pipe of wine, and
placing it in the street, would force everyone that passed by to drink
with him; threatening also to pistol them in case they would not do it.
At other times, he would do the same with barrels of ale or beer.  And,
very often, with both his hands, he would throw these liquors about the
streets and wet the clothes of such as walked by, without regarding
whether he spoiled their apparel or not, were they men or women.

"Among themselves, and to each other, these Pirates are extremely
liberal and free.  If any one of them has lost his goods, which often
happens in their manner of life, they freely give him, and make him
partaker of what they have.  In taverns and ale-houses they always have
great credit; but in such houses at Jamaica they ought not to run very
deep in debt, seeing the inhabitants of that island easily sell one
another for debt.  Thus it happened to my patron, or master, to be sold
for a debt of a tavern wherein he had spent the greater part of his
money.  This man had, within the space of three months before, three
thousand pieces of eight in ready cash, all which he wasted in that
short space of time, and became as poor as I have told you."

The same free-handed and lurid manner of life prevailed on the little
island of Tortuga, off the coast of Hayti, where the French and English
buccaneers had a lawless kingdom of their own.  In his account of the
career of the infamous L'Ollonais, Esquemeling goes on to say:

"Departing therefore thence, they took their course towards the island
Hispaniola, and arrived thither in eight days, casting anchor in a port
called Isla de la Vaca, or Cow Island.  This isle is inhabited by
French buccaneers[9] who most commonly sell the flesh they hunt to
Pirates and others who now and then put in there with intent of
victualing or trading with them.  Here they unladed the whole cargo of
riches which they had robbed; the usual storehouse of the Pirates being
commonly under the shelter of the buccaneers.  Here also they made a
dividend amongst them of all of their prizes and gains, according to
that order and degree which belonged to everyone.  Having cast up the
account and made exact calculation of all they had purchased, they
found in ready money two hundred and three-score thousand pieces of
eight.  Whereupon, this being divided, everyone received to his share
in money, and also in pieces of silk, linen and other commodities, the
value of above hundred pieces of eight.  Those who had been wounded in
this expedition received their part before all the rest; I mean such
recompenses as I spoke of the first Book, for the loss of their limbs
which many sustained.[10]

"Afterwards they weighed all the plate that was uncoined, reckoning
after the rate of ten pieces of eight for every pound.  The jewels were
prized with much variety, either at too high or too low rates; being
thus occasioned by their own ignorance.  This being done, everyone was
put to his oath again, that he had not concealed anything nor
subtracted from the common stock.  Hence they proceeded to the dividend
of what shares belonged to such as were dead amongst them, either in
battle or otherwise.  These shares were given to their friends to be
kept entire for them, and to be delivered in due time to their nearest
relatives, or whomsoever should appear to be their lawful heirs.

"The whole dividend being entirely finished, they set sail thence for
the Isle of Tortuga.  Here they arrived one month after, to the great
joy of most that were upon the island.  For as to the common Pirates,
in three weeks they had scarce any money left them; having spent it all
in things of little value, or at play either at cards or dice.  Here
also arrived, not long before them, two French ships laden with wine
and brandy and other things of this kind; whereby these liquors, at the
arrival of the Pirates, were sold indifferent cheap.  But this lasted
not long; for soon after they were enhanced extremely, a gallon of
brandy being sold for four pieces of eight.  The Governor of the island
bought of the Pirates the whole cargo of the ship laden with cacao,
giving them for that rich commodity scarce the twentieth part of what
it was worth.  Thus they made shift to lose and spend the riches they
had got in much less time than they were purchased by robbing.  The
taverns, according to the custom of Pirates, got the greatest part
thereof; insomuch that soon after they were constrained to seek more by
the same unlawful means they had obtained the preceding."

Morgan himself buried none of his vast treasure, although legend
persists in saying so, nor did he waste it in riotous living.  From the
looting of Panama alone he took booty to the value of two million
dollars as his share, and he had no need to hide it.  He was thought so
well of in England that Charles II knighted him, and he was appointed
Commissary of the Admiralty.  For some time he lived in England,
published his _Voyage to Panama_ in 1683, and spent his remaining years
in Jamaica as an opulent and influential person in high favor with the
ruling powers, and a terror to the luckless, beggared comrades who had
helped him win his fortune.  As governor of the island he hanged as
many as he could lay hands on, a kind of ingratitude not at all
inconsistent with the traits of character he had displayed as a pirate.
He did not hesitate to rob his own men, according to Esquemeling from
whose narrative of the great expedition against Panama the following
paragraphs are taken as indicative of the methods of this great
freebooter of the Spanish Main:

"Not long after Captain Morgan arrived at Jamaica, he found many of his
chief officers and soldiers reduced to their former state of indigence
through their immoderate vices and debauchery.  Hence they ceased not
to importune him for new invasions and exploits, thereby to get
something to expend anew in wine, as they had already wasted what was
secured so little before.  Captain Morgan being willing to follow
fortune while she called him, hereupon stopped the mouths of many of
the inhabitants of Jamaica, who were creditors to his men for large
sums of money, with the hopes and promises he gave them of greater
achievements than ever, by a new expedition he was going about.  This
being done, he needed not give himself much concern to levy men for
this or any other enterprise, his name being now so famous through all
those islands that that alone would readily bring him in more men than
he could readily employ.  He undertook therefore to equip a new fleet
of ships; for which purpose he assigned the south side of the Isle of
Tortuga as a place of rendezvous.  With this resolution he wrote divers
letters to all the ancient and expert Pirates there inhabiting, as also
to the Governor of the said Isle, and to the planters and hunters of
Hispaniola, giving them to understand his intentions, and desiring
their appearance at the said place, in case they intended to go with
him.  All these people had no sooner understood his designs than they
flocked to the place assigned in huge numbers, with ships, canoes, and
boats, being desirous to obey his commands....  Thus all were present
at the place assigned, and in readiness, against the 24th day of
October, 1670."

Special articles of agreement for the division of the treasure of
Panama were drawn up by Morgan before his fleet sailed.  "Herein it was
stipulated that he should have the hundredth part of all that was
gotten to himself alone: That every captain should draw the shares of
eight men, for the expenses of his ship, besides his own: That the
surgeon, besides his ordinary pay, should have two hundred pieces of
eight, for his chest of medicine: And every carpenter, above his common
salary, should draw one hundred pieces of eight.  Lastly, unto him that
in any battle should signalize himself, either by entering the first
any castle, or taking down the Spanish colors and setting up the
English, they constituted fifty pieces of eight for a reward.  In the
head of these articles it was stipulated that all these extraordinary
salaries, recompenses and rewards should be paid out of the first spoil
or purchase they should take, according as every one should then occur
to be either rewarded or paid."

The expedition was a gorgeous success, for "on the 24th of February, of
the year 1671, Captain Morgan departed from the city of Panama, or
rather from the place where the said city of Panama had stood; of the
spoils whereof he carried with him one hundred and seventy-five beasts
of carriage, laden with silver, gold and other precious things, besides
six hundred prisoners, more or less, between men, women, children and
slaves....  About the middle of the way to the castle of Chagre,
Captain Morgan commanded his men to be placed in due order, according
to their custom, and caused every one to be sworn that they had
reserved nor concealed nothing privately to themselves, even not so
much as the value of sixpence.  This being done, Captain Morgan, having
had some experience that those lewd fellows would not much stickle to
swear falsely in points of interest, he commanded every one to be
searched very strictly both in their clothes and satchels and
everywhere it might be presumed they had reserved anything.  Yea, to
the intent this order might not be ill taken by his companions, he
permitted himself to be searched, even to the very soles of his shoes.
To this office, by common consent, there was assigned one out of every
company to be the searcher of all the rest.  The French Pirates that
went on this expedition with Captain Morgan were not well satisfied
with this new custom of searching.

"From Chagre, Captain Morgan sent presently after his arrival a great
boat to Porto Bello, wherein were all the prisoners he had taken at the
Isle of St. Catharine, demanding by them a considerable ransom for the
castle of Chagre, where he then was, threatening otherwise to ruin and
demolish it even to the ground.  To this message those of Porto Bello
made answer: That they would not give one farthing towards the ransom
of the said castle, and that the English might do with it as they
pleased.  The answer being come, the dividend was made of all the spoil
they had purchased in that voyage.  Thus every company and every
particular person therein included, received their portion of what was
got; or rather, what part thereof Captain Morgan was pleased to give
them.  For so it was, that the rest of his companions, even of his own
nation, complained of his proceedings in this particular, and feared
not to tell him openly to his face that he had reserved the best jewels
to himself.  For they judged it impossible that no greater share should
belong to them than two hundred pieces of eight per capita, of so many
valuable booties and robberies as they had obtained.  Which small sum
they thought too little reward for so much labor and such huge and
manifest dangers as they had so often exposed their lives to.  But
Captain Morgan was deaf to all these and many other complaints of this
kind, having designed in his mind to cheat them of as much as he could.

"At last, Captain Morgan finding himself obnoxious to many obloquies
and detractions among his people, began to fear the consequences
thereof, and hereupon thinking it unsafe to remain any longer time at
Chagre, he commanded the ordnance of the said castle to be carried on
board his ship.  Afterwards he caused the greatest part of the walls to
be demolished, and the edifices to be burnt, and as many other things
spoiled and ruined as could conveniently be done in a short while.
These orders being performed, he went secretly on board his own ship,
without giving any notice of his departure to his Companions, nor
calling any council, as he used to do.  Thus he set sail and put out to
sea, not bidding anybody adieu, being only followed by three or four
vessels of the whole fleet.

"These were such (as the French Pirates believed) as went shares with
Captain Morgan, towards the best and greatest part of the spoil which
had been concealed from them in the dividend.  The Frenchmen could very
willingly have revenged this affront upon Captain Morgan and those that
followed him, had they found themselves with sufficient means to
encounter him at sea.  But they were destitute of most things necessary
thereto.  Yea, they had much ado to find sufficient victuals and
provisions for their voyage to Panama, he having left them totally
unprovided of all things."

Esquemeling's commentary on this base conduct of the leader is
surprisingly pious: "Captain Morgan left us all in such a miserable
condition as might serve for a lively representation of what reward
attends wickedness at the latter end of life.  Whence we ought to have
learned how to regulate and amend our actions for the future."

Sir Francis Drake, "sea king of the sixteenth century," the greatest
admiral of the time, belongs not with the catalogue of pirates and
buccaneers, yet he left a true tale of buried treasure among his
exploits and it is highly probable that some of that rich plunder is
hidden to-day in the steaming jungle of the road he took to Panama.
There were only forty-eight Englishmen in the band which he led on the
famous raid to ambush the Spanish treasure train bound to
Nombre-de-Dios, a century before Morgan's raiders crossed the Isthmus.
This first attempt resulted in failure, but after sundry adventures,
Drake returned and hid his little force close by that famous treasure
port of Nombre-de-Dios, where they waited to hear the bells of the
pack-mule caravan moving along the trail from Panama.  It was at dawn
when this distant, tinkling music was first heard, and the Cimaroons,
or Indian guides, were jubilant.  "Now they assured us we should have
more Gold and Silver than all of us could bear away."  Soon the
Englishmen had glimpses of three royal treasure trains plodding along
the leafy road, one of fifty mules, the others of seventy each, and
every one of them laden with three hundred pounds weight of silver
bullion, or thirty tons in all.  The guard of forty-five Spanish
soldiers loafed carelessly in front and rear, their guns slung on their
backs.

Drake and his bold seamen poured down from a hill, put the guard to
flight, and captured the caravan with the loss of only two men.  There
was more plunder than they could carry back to their ships in a hasty
retreat, and "being weary, they were content with a few bars and quoits
of gold."  The silver was buried in the expectation of returning for it
later, "partly in the burrows which the great land-crabs have made in
the earth, and partly under old trees which are fallen thereabouts, and
partly in the sand and gravel of a river not very deep of water."

Then began a forced march, every man burdened with all the treasure he
could carry, and behind them the noise of "both horse and foot coming,
as it seemed, to the mules."  Presently a wounded French captain became
so exhausted that he had to drop out, refusing to delay the march and
telling the company that he would remain behind in the woods with two
of his men, "in hope that some rest would recover his better strength."
Ere long another Frenchman was missed, and investigation discovered
that he had "drunk much wine," and doubtless desired to sleep it off.

Reaching Rio Francisco, Drake was dismayed to find his pinnaces gone,
and his party stranded.  The vessels were recovered after delay and
perilous adventure, whereupon Drake hastened to prepare another
expedition "to get intelligence in what case the country stood, and if
might be, recover Monsieur Tetu, the French captain, and leastwise
bring away the buried silver."  The party was just about to start
inland when on the beach appeared one of the two men who had stayed
behind with the French captain.  At sight of Drake he "fell down on his
knees, blessing God for the time that ever our Captain was born, who
now beyond all his hope, was become his deliverer."

He related that soon after they had been left behind in the forest, the
Spaniards had captured Captain Tetu and the other man.  He himself had
escaped by throwing down his treasure and taking to his heels.
Concerning the buried silver, he had lamentable tidings to impart.  The
Spanish had got wind of it, and he "thought there had been near two
thousand Spaniards and Negroes there to dig and search for it."
However, the expedition pushed forward, and the news was confirmed.
"The earth every way a mile distant had been digged and turned up in
every place of any likelihood to have anything hidden in it."  It was
learned that the general location of the silver had been divulged to
the Spaniards by that rascally Frenchman who had got drunk and deserted
during the march to the coast.  He had been caught while asleep, and
the soldiers from Nombre-de-Dios tortured him until he told all that he
knew about the treasure.

The Englishmen poked around and quickly found "thirteen bars of silver
and some few quoits of gold," with which they posted back to Rio
Francisco, not daring to linger in the neighborhood of an overwhelming
force of the enemy.  It was their belief that the Spanish recovered by
no means all of those precious tons of silver bullion, and Drake made
sail very reluctantly.  It may well be that a handsome hoard still
awaits the search of some modern argonauts, or that the steam shovels
of the workmen of the Panama canal may sometime swing aloft a burden of
"bars of silver and quoits of gold" in their mighty buckets.  Certain
it is that Sir Francis Drake is to be numbered among that romantic
company of sea rovers of other days who buried vast treasure upon the
Spanish Main.



[1] _The Pirates' Own Book_.

[2] The famous merchant and philanthropist of Philadelphia.

[3] "I happen to know the fact that Blackbeard, whose family name was
given as Teach, was in reality named Drumond, a native of Bristol.  I
have learned this fact from one of his family and name, of respectable
standing in Virginia, near Hampton."  (Watson's Annals of Philadelphia.)

In the contemporary court records of the Carolina colony, the name of
Blackbeard is given as Thatch.

[4] Israel Hands was tried and condemned with Blackboard's crew, but
was pardoned by royal proclamation, and, according to Captain Johnson,
"was alive some time ago in London, begging his bread."  This would
indicate that he had buried no treasure of his own, and had not
fathomed Blackbeard's secret.  Stevenson borrowed the name of Israel
Hands for one of his crew of pirates in "Treasure Island."

[5] _The Pirates' Own Book_.

[6] This is from _The Pirates' Own Book_.  Captain Johnson's version is
unexpurgated and to be preferred, for he declares that Blackbeard cried
out, "Damnation seize my soul if I give you quarter, or take any from
you."

[7] As showing the fanciful tastes in sinister flags, Captain Johnson
records that Captain Roberts flew "a black silk flag at the mizzen
peak, and a jack and pendant at the same.  The flag had a death's head
on it, with an hour glass in one hand, and cross bones in the other, a
dart by one, and underneath a heart dropping three drops of blood."

[8] _The Buccaneers of America_.  A True Account of the Most Remarkable
Assaults Committed of Late Years Upon the Coasts of the West Indies by
the Buccaneers of Jamaica and Tortuga (Both English and French).
Wherein are contained more especially the Unparalleled Exploits of Sir
Henry Morgan, our English Jamaican hero who sacked Porto Bello, burnt
Panama, etc.  (Published in 1684.)

[9]The buccaneers derived their name from the process of drying beef
over a wood fire, or _boucane_ in French.  They were at first hunters
of wild cattle in the island of Hispaniola or Hayti who disposed of
their product to smugglers, traders, and pirates, but they were a
distinct class from the _filibustiers_ or sea rovers.  As cattle became
scarce and the Spanish more hostile and cruel foes, the buccaneers,
French and English, forsook their trade and took to the sea, to harry
the common foe.

[10] The schedule thus referred to stipulated that for the crew, except
the officers specified, it was a case of "no prey, no pay."  For the
loss of a right arm, the consolation money was six hundred pieces of
eight, or six slaves; for the loss of a left arm, five hundred pieces
of eight, or five slaves; for the left leg, four hundred pieces of
eight, or four slaves; for an eye one hundred pieces of eight, or one
slave; for a finger of the hand the same reward as for the eye.  "All
which sums of money, as I have said before, are taken out of the
capital sum or common stock of what is got by their piracy."




CHAPTER XVI

PRACTICAL HINTS FOR TREASURE SEEKERS

Faith, imagination, and a vigorous physique comprise the essential
equipment of a treasure seeker.  Capital is desirable, but not
absolutely necessary, for it would be hard indeed to find a
neighborhood in which some legend or other of buried gold is not
current.  If one is unable to finance an expedition aboard a swift,
black-hulled schooner, it is always possible to dig for the treasure of
poor Captain Kidd and it is really a matter of small importance that he
left no treasure in his wake.  The zest of the game is in seeking.  A
pick and a shovel are to be obtained in the wood-shed or can be
purchased at the nearest hardware store for a modest outlay.  A
pirate's chart is to be highly esteemed, but if the genuine article
cannot be found, there are elderly seafaring men in every port who will
furnish one just as good and perjure themselves as to the information
thereof with all the cheerfulness in the world.

It has occurred to the author that a concise directory of the
best-known lost and buried treasure might be of some service to persons
of an adventurous turn of mind, and the following tabloid guide for
ready reference may perhaps prove helpful, particularly to parents of
small boys who have designs on pirate hoards, as well as to boys who
have never grown up.

_Cocos Island_.  In the Pacific Ocean off the coast of Costa Rica.
Twelve million dollars in plate, coin, bar gold, and jewels buried by
buccaneers and by seamen who pirated the treasure of Lima.

_Trinidad_.  In the South Atlantic off the coast of Brazil.  The vast
booty of sea-rovers who plundered the richest cities of South America.
A very delectable and well-authenticated treasure, indeed, with all the
proper charts and appurtenances.  Specially recommendeded.

_The Salvages_.  A group of small islands to the southward of Madeira.
Two million dollars of silver in chests, buried by the crew of a
Spanish ship in 1804.  They killed their captain and laid him on top of
the treasure, wherefore proper precautions must be taken to appease his
ghost before beginning to dig.

_Cape St. Vincent_.  West coast of Madagascar.  The wreck of a
Dutch-built ship of great age is jammed fast between the rocks.  Gold
and silver money has been washed from her and cast up on the beach, and
a large fortune still remains among her timbers.  Expeditions are
advised to fit out at Mozambique.

_Venanguebe Bay_, thirty-five miles south south-west of Ngoncy Island
on the east coast of Madagascar.  A sunken treasure is supposed to be
not far from the wreck of the French frigate _Gloire_ lost in 1761.
Expeditions will do well to keep a weather eye lifted along all this
coast for the treasures of the pirates who infested these waters in the
days of Captain Kidd.

_Gough Island_, sometimes called Diego Alvarez.  Latitude 40 deg. 19' S.
Longitude 9 deg. 44' W.  It is well known that on this unfrequented bit
of sea-washed real estate, a very wicked pirate or pirates deposited
ill-gotten gains.  The place to dig is close to a conspicuous spire or
pinnacle of stone on the western end of the island, the name of which
natural landmark is set down on the charts as Church Rock.

_Juan Fernandez_.  South Pacific.  Famed as the abode of Robinson
Crusoe who was too busy writing the story of his life to find the
buccaneer's wealth concealed in a cave, also the wreck of a Spanish
galleon reputed to have been laden with bullion from the mines of Peru.

_Auckland Islands_.  Remote and far to the southward and hardly to be
recommended to the amateur treasure seeker who had better serve his
apprenticeship nearer home.  Frequently visited by expeditions from
Melbourne and Sydney.  In 1866, the sailing ship _General Grant_, bound
from Australia to London, was lost here.  In her cargo were fifty
thousand ounces of gold.  In a most extraordinary manner the vessel was
driven by the seas into a great cavern in the cliff from which only a
handful of her people managed to escape.  They lived for eighteen
months on this desert island before being taken off.  The hulk of the
_General Grant_ is still within the cave, but the undertow and the
great combers have thus far baffled the divers.

_Luzon_.  One of the Philippine Islands.  Near Calumpit, in the swamps
of the Rio Grande, the Chinese Mandarin, Chan Lee Suey, buried his
incalculable wealth soon after the British captured Manila in 1762.
His jewels were dazzling, and a string of pearls, bought from the
Sultan of Sulu, was said to be the finest in the Orient.

_Nightingale Island_.  Near Tristan da Cunha.  South Atlantic.  One
chest of pirate's silver was found here and brought to the United
States, but much more is said to remain hidden.

_Tobermory Bay_.  Island of Mull.  Western Scotland.  Wreck of the
galleon _Florencia_ of the Spanish Armada.  Said to have contained
thirty millions of treasure.  Permission to investigate must be
obtained from His Grace, the Duke of Argyll.

_Vigo Bay_.  Coast of Spain.  Spanish plate fleet sunk by the English
and Dutch.  A trifling matter of a hundred million dollars or more are
waiting for the right man to come along and fish them up.  Treasure
seekers had better first consult the Spanish Government at Madrid in
order to avoid misunderstandings with the local officials.

_East River_.  Manhattan Island, New York.  Wreck of the British
frigate _Hussar_ which carried to the bottom, in 1780, more than two
and a half million dollars in gold consigned to the paymasters of the
army and naval forces that were fighting the American forces of George
Washington.  She was sailing for Newport and struck a rock nearly
opposite the upper end of Randall's Island, sinking one hundred yards
from shore.

_Oak Island_.  Nova Scotia.  Near Chester.  Unmistakable remains of a
deep shaft sunk by pirates and an underground connection with the bay.
A company is now digging, and will probably sell shares at a reasonable
price.  Buying shares in a treasure company is less fatiguing than
handling the pick and shovel oneself.

_Isthmus of Panama_.  Directions somewhat vague.  Sir Francis Drake
left part of the loot of old Panama concealed along his line of
retreat, but none of his crew was considerate enough to transmit to
posterity a chart marked with the proper crosses and bearings.

_Dollar Cove_.  Mount's Bay, Cornwall.  Wreck of treasure ship _Saint
Andrew_, belonging to the king of Portugal.  Driven out of her course
from Flanders to a home port in 1526.  An ancient document written by
one Thomas Porson, an Englishman on board states that "by the Grace and
Mercy of God, the greater part of the crew got safely to land," and
that, assisted by some of the inhabitants, they also saved part of the
cargo including blocks of silver bullion, silver vessels and plate,
precious stones, brooches and chains of gold, cloth of Arras, tapestry,
satins, velvets, and four sets of armor for the king of Portugal.
According to Porson, no sooner had these treasures been carried to the
top of the cliffs than three local squires with sixty armed retainers
attacked the shipwrecked men and carried off the booty.

Modern treasure seekers disbelieve this document and prefer the
statement of one of the squires concerned, St. Aubyn by name, that they
rode to the place to give what help they could, but the cargo of
treasure could not be saved.

_Cape Vidal_.  Coast of Zululand.  Wreck of mysterious sailing vessel
_Dorothea_ said to have had a huge fortune in gold bricks cemented
under his floor, stolen gold from the mines of the Rand.  In 1900, May
21st, an item in the Government Estimates of the Legislative Assembly
in the Natal Parliament was discussed under the heading, "Expenditure
in connection with buried gold at Cape Vidal, search for discovery,
L173 19s. 3d."  "Mr. Evans asked if a syndicate had been formed and
what expectations the Government had to give.  (Hear, hear.)  The Prime
Minister said there were several syndicates formed to raise the
treasure.  The government had reason to believe that they knew where
the treasure was hidden, and started an expedition on their own
account.  But unfortunately they had not been able to find the
treasure.  Mr. Evans: The Government was in for a bad spec.
(Laughter.)  The item passed."

Space is given to the foregoing because it stamps with official
authority the story of the treasure of Cape Vidal.  When a government
goes treasure hunting there must be something in it.

_Lake Guatavita_.  Near Bogota.  Republic of Colombia.  The treasure of
El Dorado, the Gilded Man.  To find this gold involves driving a tunnel
through the side of a mountain and draining the lake.  This is such a
formidable undertaking that it will not appeal to the average treasure
seeker unless, perchance, he might pick up a second hand tunnel
somewhere at a bargain price.  Even then, transportation from the sea
coast to Bogota is so difficult and costly that it would hardly be
practicable to saw the tunnel into sections and have it carried over
the mountains on mule-back.




THE END











End of Project Gutenberg's The Book of Buried Treasure, by Ralph D. Paine

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF BURIED TREASURE ***

***** This file should be named 33318.txt or 33318.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/3/1/33318/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
