The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Peddler's Boy, by Francis C. Woodworth

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Peddler's Boy
       Or; I'll Be Somebody

Author: Francis C. Woodworth

Release Date: August 8, 2010 [EBook #33372]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PEDDLER'S BOY ***




Produced by Jeannie Howse, David Garcia and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The University of Florida, The Internet
Archive/Children's Library)






       *       *       *       *       *

    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Transcriber's Note:                                       |
    |                                                           |
    | Inconsistent hyphenation in the original document has     |
    | been preserved.                                           |
    |                                                           |
    | Obvious typographical errors have been corrected. For     |
    | a complete list, please see the end of this document.     |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *

    [Illustration: THE PEDDLER AND HIS GRANDCHILDREN.]




UNCLE FRANK'S
BOY'S & GIRL'S LIBRARY,

BY

FRANCIS C. WOODWORTH,
EDITOR OF WOODWORTH'S YOUTH'S CABINET.

    [Illustration]




THE
PEDDLER'S BOY;

OR,

"I'LL BE SOMEBODY."


With Tinted Illustrations.

BY UNCLE FRANK,
AUTHOR OF "A PEEP AT OUR NEIGHBORS," "WILLOW LANE STORIES,"
"THE DIVING BELL," ETC., ETC.


BOSTON:
PHILLIPS, SAMPSON & CO.,
PUBLISHERS.




Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1851, by
PHILLIPS, SAMPSON & CO.,
In the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the District of
Massachusetts.




C.W. BENEDICT,
STEREOTYPER AND PRINTER,
201 William st., N.Y.




CONTENTS.


                                                             PAGE

A BIRD'S-EYE GLANCE,                                            7

PEDDLERS AND PEDDLING,                                         14

THE OTHER SIDE,                                                32

DEACON BISSELL,                                                36

THE YOUNGEST BOY,                                              48

A NOBLE RESOLUTION,                                            60

A TALK ABOUT THE FUTURE,                                       75

THANKSGIVING AND TEMPTATION,                                   80

PATRIOTISM AND POWDER,                                         89

THE GLASS OF GIN,                                             100

LIFE IN A FACTORY,                                            111

A GLANCE AT FREDERICK,                                        120

SAMUEL IN BOSTON,                                             132

THE FLOUR STORE,                                              140

THE WINDING UP,                                               152




ILLUSTRATIONS.


THE PEDDLER AND HIS GRANDCHILDREN,                 (Frontispiece)

VIGNETTE TITLE-PAGE,                                            1

SAMUEL AND THE SCHOOLMASTER,                                   52

LOOKING THROUGH THE TELESCOPE,                                 65

A TALK ABOUT THE FUTURE,                                       74

THE YOUNG DRUMMER,                                             93

THE DRUNKARD, WITH HIS FATHER,                                128

MR. BISSELL AND HIS CHILDREN,                                 147




THE PEDDLER'S BOY.




CHAP. I.

A BIRD'S-EYE GLANCE.


Among the many beautiful villages near Boston, there is one quite as
beautiful as any, situated but a few miles from that busy metropolis,
called--but I must not mention its name; that is of very little
consequence. A few rods from the Common, the pride of the Bostonians,
is the depot of the railroad which passes through this place; and one
has only to jump into the cars, and in less than fifteen minutes he is
there. Uncle Frank has some dear friends in this village, and choice
spirits they are, in his estimation. How much this fact has to do with
his opinion of the beauty of the place, he does not pretend to say. He
has scarcely settled it in his own mind. Nor is it much matter, as the
story about to be related will neither lose nor gain much in its
interest, by the good or ill opinion which the reader may happen to
have of the village itself; though I may be pardoned for adding that
I should put rather a low value upon the taste of that man, or woman,
or child, who could visit this part of the country, when Nature has
her best dress on, and not pronounce it one of the most delightful
spots, in his or her opinion, that the sun or moon ever shone upon.

Among my friends in this charming village, is one whom, at present, I
will call Mr. Bissell--Mr. _Samuel Bissell_. I will call him so for
the present, I say. His real name is no more like Bissell than yours
is--no more like Samuel Bissell than it is like John Smith or George
Jones; but I think he will forgive us, though, for taking such a
liberty with his "good name," should he ever happen to come across
this story, and should it prove to him a sort of looking-glass, in
which he can see his own features.

When he was a lad, about twelve years old, his father, who had been
possessed of a handsome property, failed in business, and as Samuel
says, "became as poor as a church mouse." What would have taken place
if Samuel's father had been successful in his business affairs, so
that it would not have been absolutely necessary for the lad to work
for a living, is more than I can say. Probably it is more than anybody
can say. Very likely it would not have been as well for Samuel. It is
a good thing for boys and girls to work. Idleness is the cause of a
great deal of mischief. I really pity the boy whose father brings him
up without giving him a chance to learn some trade or profession. I am
always afraid that, in such cases, the lad will learn a trade "on his
own hook," and one which will give him trouble, if his father or
guardian does not himself see that he gets something better to do.

As I was saying, it is impossible to tell what would have been the
history of Samuel Bissell, if, by his father's failure in business, he
had not been driven to get a living by his own labor. It is enough for
us to know what his history actually was in the circumstances in which
he was placed when his father, by a sudden change of fortune, became a
poor man.

But I must go back a little in my history. I want you to see and mark
well two or three things, which, though little in themselves, are very
important. Little things, let me tell you, are not to be despised,
because they are little. A very small stream of water, which you might
easily wade across, can set the machinery of a whole factory in
motion. Half a dozen marks made with a pen in as many seconds, are
sufficient to send weeping and death into every family in an empire.
So I must go back a few years in the history of our young friend, and
see where he was, what he was, and what sort of a bringing up he had,
before the time of his father's unfortunate failure.




CHAP. II.

PEDDLERS AND PEDDLING.


I have more than half a mind to give you a rough sketch of the _Yankee
Peddler_.

"But I know all about this race of men already," perhaps you will say.

Do you? Well, then, consider my sketch as having been made for another
reader, and not for you. The fact is--for I want to let you into one
of my little secrets, just here, to start with--the story I am
telling is one about a peddler's boy; and I have got a notion that it
would be a good plan to devote one chapter, before I have any more to
do with the boy himself, to that famous class of men who get their
living principally by peddling small wares about the country.

The peddler--the genuine Massachusetts or Connecticut peddler--usually
has a wagon built on purpose for his business, so fitted up that it
will conveniently hold all the articles he has for sale. One who has
ever taken a peep into a peddler's wagon, will not need to be told
that his assortment comprises a great many different articles. Tin
ware occupies a large space. In this department may be found tin
ovens, sauce pans, milk pans, graters, skimmers, and things of that
sort. Then the genuine peddler is always provided with two tin trunks,
I believe--trunks which are large enough to hold about half a bushel
each. These trunks are stored full of little knick-knacks, "too
numerous to mention," as the dealer in dry goods has it in his
advertisement.

The peddler does not often drive his trade in the city. He finds the
country the best place for him. So you generally come across him where
there are not many stores, and where the houses are not very close
together. He stops before the door of a house. I say _he_ stops; but I
ought rather to have said _his horse_; for the old nag, who, perhaps,
has been in his service for a quarter of a century, stops of her own
accord at the door of every respectable looking house on the route.
She needs no hint from her master in relation to this matter.

Indeed, I once heard of a peddler's mare, who was so well persuaded
that it would be for the interest of her master to stop at the gate of
a certain large and neat-looking farm-house, which gate the peddler
seemed, for once, disposed to pass by, that she actually stopped in
the road, and looked round at the man who had the helm, as if she
would say, "My dear sir, there must be some mistake about this matter.
Are you crazy? Upon my word, this is one of the strangest things that
has ever turned up since we've been driving this peddling business."

We will suppose, now, that the faithful horse, guided by something
which, for want of a better name, people generally call _instinct_,
but which seems to me a good deal like _reason_, has stopped at the
door of a house. The peddler, taking good care to carry along with him
the tin trunks before mentioned, leaves the wagon, and goes into the
house, the faithful mare, in the meantime, leisurely grazing, if it is
summer, and stamping and kicking, just for exercise, in order to keep
warm, if it is winter.

"Any tin ware to-day, madam?" the peddler asks. Perhaps madam does
want some tin ware, and perhaps she does not. We will suppose, now,
that as far as the department of tin ware is concerned, her wants have
been entirely supplied. Then follows a partial enumeration of the
contents of the two trunks. Did you ever hear a peddler rattle over
the names of these small wares? He does it as rapidly, almost, as a
bobolink goes through the different notes of his song: "Any pins,
needles, sewing silk, twist, buttons, tape, jew's harps, hooks and
eyes, scissors, penknives, pocket books, handkerchiefs, breast pins,
ear rings"--and so he runs on, hardly waiting for the good lady, who
is looking over the articles by this time, to put in a word edgewise.

Peddlers, as a class, are set down as pretty wide awake in driving a
bargain. They have been slandered, I doubt not. A great deal of
unfairness and dishonesty have been charged to them, of which they
never were guilty. Still, I think they are apt to be pretty shrewd and
keen, when they are trading. Sometimes, no doubt, though not always,
they are _too_ shrewd and keen to be strictly honest; for there is a
point where shrewdness and keenness ought to stop.

When I was a little boy, I lived in Connecticut. My home was in the
very bosom of the country. It was not often that anybody from the busy
world came there; and when one did come, he was sure to make something
of a stir, especially among us little folks. The advent of a tin
peddler's wagon, I recollect, I hailed as a most remarkable event. It
always seemed to me that a peddler's head was as full of knowledge as
it could well hold. Such a budget of news as he always opened! Such
smart things as those which came from his mouth! Such wonderful good
nature as he showed towards the children. Why I don't remember that I
ever heard a peddler speak cross to a boy, though we used always to
tumble over the nameless "notions" in his trunks to our hearts'
content, all the time he stayed in the house. I hardly know which
interested me more, the driving up to our door of a peddler's wagon,
or the entrance into our kitchen of half a dozen Mohegan Indians, with
their squaws and pappooses.

The age of clock peddlers had not come then. Wooden clocks are plenty
as blackberries now; and you can buy one for a song, almost. But
Connecticut clocks were quite unknown in my childhood. Now, I suppose,
the peddlers sell more clocks than tin ovens and sauce pans. But the
peddler of clocks and the peddler of tin ware is, in all important
particulars, one and the same.

Did you ever hear of the peddler who sold a load of clocks that would
only keep in order twenty-four hours, and hardly that? It seems that
his clocks were, like Peter Pindar's razors, _made to sell_, and not
to run. Well, he went a good way off from home, before he offered any
of his wares for sale. He found no trouble in selling the clocks, for
they were wonderfully cheap; and besides, as he took good care to
inform all his customers, each clock was warranted, and on his way
homeward he would call at every house where he sold a clock, when he
should take pleasure in exchanging all the clocks that did not perform
well. Now it turned out that his clocks were not worth a farthing. He
sold out the whole load, though--every clock but one. Then he turned
about, and commenced his journey homeward, calling upon all his
customers, as he had agreed to do.

"Well, how did that _are_ clock run neighbor?"

"Run! it didn't run at all. It stopped as still as a gate post before
you had got up Pudding Hill!"

"Did it though, _raly_?"

"To be sure it did. What on earth did you sell me such a clock for?"

"Well, now, you needn't take on in that style. I'll give you another
clock. I told you I would, when I sold it to you."

So the cunning peddler gives his customer the only clock he has left,
and takes the one he sold him at first, in place of it. And that is
the way the fellow managed all the way home.

There are a great many stories told about peddlers, which, I presume,
are not true, and it is sometimes rather difficult to sift the genuine
stuff from the chaff. I really don't know how much to believe of the
anecdotes of Connecticut peddlers of former times. It is a matter of
history, that they sold wooden nutmegs, and horn gun flints, and
white-wood cucumber seeds, and white oak hams. But I should not wonder
if these stories were made out of whole cloth. The truth is, there
have been, first and last, a great many false charges made against
"the land of steady habits."

It is a common notion that peddlers are very apt to make dupes of the
ladies. Perhaps they are. But I know of one instance in which a
peddler got nicely come up with by a lady. I don't believe any man
could have done it better. The story is this. A peddler, with a wagon
load of tin ware, drove up to the door of a house around which quite a
number of children were playing. The mistress of the house made her
appearance, and was urged to trade. She had no money, she said. That
was no matter, the peddler replied. He would take anything in
pay--rags, old clothes, worn out tin, anything. But she hadn't got
_anything_.

"Well," the peddler continued, "I'll take one of your children."

The lady thought a moment. "Very good," said she, "you may have that
ragged boy yonder for ten dollars, and I'll take the value of him in
tin."

The bargain was struck.

The lady selected the tin ware, and it was carried into the house. The
peddler mounted his seat, with the ragged urchin by his side, and
threatened to drive off. "Of course," he thought, "she will not let
me go away with the boy. She will pay me the money, when she sees that
I am _raly_ going." He was mistaken, though. He had reckoned without
his host, this time.

Crack went the whip. "I'm going now," said he. "I'm off in less than
no time."

"Very well," said the good woman; "so I supposed."

He actually started, and went a few rods, slowly, when he stopped,
turned around, and said, "There, now I'm off for _sartain_."

"So I heard you say some time ago," said the lady.

"But are you willing I should take off this _'ere_ boy?"

"Certainly," said the lady. "We keep the _town's poor_ here, and this
is the worst fellow in the lot."

The story is that the peddler, when he found how completely he was
outwitted, gave, in money, about as much as the tin he had parted with
was worth, to get out of the scrape, or in other words, to get clear
of his young pauper.




CHAP. III.

THE OTHER SIDE.


If I should stop here, in my sketch of the New England peddler, I am
not sure but I should give a false view of that class of people, and I
should be sorry to do that. I must throw some _lights_ into the
picture, in order to make it more perfect and truthful.

I have said before, that the peddler has been charged with a great
many sins which probably he never dreamed of, and certainly never
committed. But a great deal more than this is true of that large class
who make their living by selling merchandise from house to house.
There are hosts of men engaged in this business, who are strictly
honest and fair in all their dealings. They never cheat any one. They
have no disposition to cheat, any more than the merchant who sells his
goods in his own store. Besides, the business, though a great deal has
been done to make it _seem_ anything but respectable, is well enough,
in itself. There is nothing disgraceful about it. It is, or may be,
an honest calling; and it is one of Uncle Frank's doctrines that any
business that is lawful, and honest, and does nobody any harm, ought
to be considered respectable. Why not? Why ought not the boy, even,
who brushes my boots, if he knows as much, and his character is as
good, why ought he not to be respected as much as the one who sets the
types for my daily newspaper? I can't see why, and it would puzzle
anybody to see why, I guess.

I know of peddlers, good men and true, who would as soon part with
one of their fingers as to cheat any of their customers. They want to
make good bargains, when they sell anything. Of course they do. But
they want only that. They would not take advantage of a person's
ignorance of the price of an article, and sell him or her that article
for ten times as much as it is worth, just because they _can_ do it.




CHAP. IV.

DEACON BISSELL.


DEACON BISSELL--Deacon Abijah Bissell, was a peddler of this sort. I
should not wonder if some of my readers had heard of the deacon. He is
in heaven now, I doubt not. But his fame, which, while he was living,
had spread over quite a large section of country in the commonwealth
of Massachusetts, is not dead yet. I dare say scores and scores of
housewives are now on the stage, within a good deal less than a
hundred miles of Boston, who could show you milk pans still on duty in
their cheese room, which came from Deacon Bissell's wagon.

Deacon Abijah Bissell--_Buysell_ a great many people had it--occupied
a snug little house, with ever so many flowers in the door yard, and
ever so many tufts of moss on its old shingles. He did not spend more
than half his time at home. The rest was devoted to peddling. No
wandering Arab ever moved oftener from place to place than Deacon
Bissell. Still he had his orbit, and he traveled in it as regularly as
the moon, and Jupiter, and our own planet, travel in their orbits.
Every family he visited knew almost the exact day of his arrival. The
deacon had a great deal of method in everything he did. He was one of
the most punctual and precise men you ever met. An anecdote at this
moment occurs to me, which goes to show what a value he placed upon
punctuality.

Patty Bissell, his eldest daughter, was to ride over to Boston with
the old gentleman. She had been wanting to go to the city for a long
time, and she was delighted when her father invited her to go.

"Patty, how long will it take you to get ready?" asked the deacon.

"Half an hour," the girl replied.

"Well, say an hour," said the deacon. "But don't fail to be ready at
the moment. I want you to learn to be punctual, my dear."

"Oh, I shall be ready in an hour, father, and in less time, too."

"Very well."

The hour passed. The deacon was in his wagon, ready to start. "Well,
Patty," he shouted, so that his daughter could hear him in the room
where she was busy putting herself in a trim for the city. She was not
quite ready. I think she had forgotten where her gloves were, and was
ransacking every drawer in her bureau for them. The deacon spoke
again.

"In one minute," said Patty.

The deacon waited one minute more, a very long minute, according to
his watch--and off he started for Boston.

Poor Patty! The disappointment was a sore one for her. But it taught
her a lesson in punctuality which was worth more to her than a
quarter's schooling at the Roundhill Academy.

Mr. Bissell, you will please to take notice, was a _real_ deacon. In
the country, it is a very common thing, I presume you are aware, for
almost all the folks to have some handle or another fixed to their
names; and very often the handle is put on, nobody knows how, or why,
or when, or where. One man is known as a military officer, a
_captain_, perhaps, or a _general_. But when you come to inquire into
his history, you find that he never rose to a higher rank than that of
a corporal in the militia, and possibly not quite so high as that.
Another man is a _squire_. But how he came to be one, and, indeed,
what is meant by the title in his case, are questions which would
puzzle the wisest heads in the neighborhood. There are, also, in
almost every part of the country, sundry men whom everybody calls
_uncle_. Each one of them is _everybody's_ uncle in general, and
nobody's uncle in particular. _Deacons_, too, scores of them, may be
found, who have no other claim to the title than this--that they are
_called_ so, by nearly all the men, women and children in the parish.

But Mr. Bissell, as I said before, was a _real_ deacon. The title had
been given to him by the little church in his native parish. And he
was a good man, too. Some people make up their religion into a sort of
a cloak, which they regard as too nice for every day use. They put it
on and wear it every Sunday, and take it off every Monday morning, and
keep it off until Saturday night. You never get a sight of their
religion, when they are about their business. They wear long faces, to
be sure. But a face as long as a broom handle is not worth much to
Uncle Frank, as a sign of a man's piety. People may say what they
will about religion--and in this country, especially, where everybody
can think for himself, and very few get other folks to think for them,
there must be a great many different notions as to what religion
is--but people may say what they will about it, I think more of
_actions_ than I do of _words_. I don't care if a man's creed reaches
as far as from the Battery to Grace Church. If he is not fair in his
dealings, and a good neighbor, in every respect, I don't think much of
his religion.

The piety of Deacon Bissell did not all fly off in words, as a glass
of soda water flies off in foam. He was a good man on Saturdays and
Mondays, as well as on Sundays, at home as well as at church, in his
worldly business as well as out of it.

Deacon Bissell had a brother, who did a large business in Boston, and
was supposed to be very rich. Rich people, however, sometimes get a
little cramped in their business, and find it hard to get along.
Deacon Bissell's brother happened, at one time, to need some thousands
of dollars more than he had at command. He knew that the deacon had
saved quite a snug sum from the profits of his small trading, and so
he went to him, and asked him if he would put his name to a note of
some ten or twelve thousand dollars. The deacon had never done
anything of the kind before. But supposing his brother would be able
to pay the note when it was due, and always being anxious to oblige
everybody, when he could, he put his name to the note.

That note ruined Deacon Bissell. His brother could not pay it. He
failed, and his failure swept away nearly every dollar which the
deacon had been laying up for thirty years. This loss tried him very
much. He wept over it--not because he needed or wanted the lost money
for himself, but because, as he used to remark, it was one of his
darling schemes to give all his children "a good setting out" in the
world. It seemed a terrible loss to him. "If I were a young man," said
he, "I might hope to get up again. But I am old. I am almost worn out.
A few more years, I am afraid, will finish what there is left of me."




CHAP. V.

THE YOUNGEST BOY.


The deacon had several children. At the time of his failure two or
three were married, and of those that still remained at home, Samuel
was the youngest. It is natural enough for you to suppose that this
Samuel, as I am giving you such a long story about him, was a
remarkable child, a sort of prodigy. But such is not the fact, I
believe. As to his cradle life, I profess not to know much. I have
not much doubt, however, that he was very like other infants--that he
had his share of little troubles, and cried lustily over them; that he
laughed, and frolicked, and clapped his hands, like most babies; that
he went into raptures over a tin whistle and a rattle box; and that,
in short, he was as wise as most people are, at that interesting age
when the nursery seems to them to comprise the greater portion of the
habitable globe.

One of the first anecdotes I ever heard about Samuel--one which,
though it does not make him out a prodigy, shows pretty clearly what
sort of stuff he was made of, as straws show which way the wind
blows--is something like this: When Samuel was quite a small boy, and
before he had made much progress in his studies at school, there came
to board at his father's, for a few weeks, the teacher of the district
school. This man was fond of children, and took quite a fancy to
little Samuel. "Samuel," said he, one night, when the boy was playing
with a new ball, "did you know the world was round, like your ball?"
No, he had never dreamed of such a thing, he said. He had thought it
was as flat as a pancake. "Well, it is round," the teacher said,
"almost as round as a ball or a marble." The little fellow was so much
interested in what the good man told him, that he left his play, and
said he wanted to hear all about the world. So the teacher had to get
his globe, and talk to him about it, until he was hoarse.

    [Illustration: SAMUEL AND THE SCHOOLMASTER.]

I have heard another anecdote about the lad. There was a company of
some half a dozen boys and girls at the deacon's one day, and they
were all as busy as they could be. Shall I tell you what they were
busy about? They were at play. They were playing with all their
might. Among their plays were "blind man's buff," "tag," "puss, puss
in the corner," "hide and seek," "who's got the button?" and I don't
know how many other plays, which almost every child is familiar with.

While they were busy chasing each other round the yard, all of them as
merry as the birds that were having a concert on the branches, over
their heads, a wagon drove up, and Captain Lovechild got out of it,
and went into the house. This gentleman lived in Boston. He was quite
a rich man, having made a great deal of money by going to sea. The
captain was a relative of Deacon Bissell, and often came to see him
and his family, taking good care, generally, in his visits, to bring
something with him to please the little folks.

It was almost sunset when the children were called into the house.
Supper was nearly ready, and a very nice supper it was to be, for Mrs.
Bissell always took great pains to make the children happy when they
visited at her house.

Captain Lovechild, as usual, was glad to see the children, and the
children were quite as glad to see him. They all liked him. Why they
liked him, I suppose, not having thought on that subject much, they
would hardly have been able to tell. But I mistrust--I give it as a
sort of a _guess_--that the nice things he was so sure to have ready
for them, when he met them, had a little to do with their affection. I
remember--if you will allow Uncle Frank to travel out of his road a
few paces--I remember a lesson which was once beaten into my head by
my little niece. I was going away from home--to Boston, perhaps--when
I called the little girl to me, and said,

"Well, Mary, I'm going away, to be gone, a long, long time."

"O, don't go, uncle," she said; "I don't want you to go away."

"But I must go, dear."

"I shall cry if you do."

"Not a great deal, I guess."

"O, yes, I shall; I shall feel very bad."

"Well, Mary, I can't stay at home; I shall have to go to Boston; and I
presume you will feel sorry to have me go; but suppose I should bring
you something nice when I come back--a little rabbit, or something of
the kind?"

"O, then you may go, uncle," said Mary, clapping her hands, as a
certain lord of the barn yard does his wings, just before crowing, and
dancing up and down, as if she saw the little white rabbit, with his
long ears and red eyes, actually munching his clover and bean pods on
the carpet.

Ha! ha! ha! The lesson Uncle Frank learned then was, that the love of
children sometimes lies on the surface of the heart, and does not
reach quite to the bottom of it. However, I suppose the same is true
of grown people, too, sometimes, though they are usually more careful
as to what they say, so that they do not let the cat out of the bag.

But I shall be taken up as a _vagrant_, if I go wandering about in
this style.




CHAP. VI.

A NOBLE RESOLUTION.


As I said, the children all liked the good old gentleman, for some
reason or other. Now I think of it, I guess the reason of their liking
him might have been hid away in some sly place, as was the reason of
Mr. Somebody for _not_ liking Doctor Fell. This Mr. Somebody used to
say, as you probably have heard,

    "I do not like you, Doctor Fell,
    The reason why I cannot tell."

If the children had put their thoughts into rhyme, as Mr. Somebody
did, when he gave vent to his feelings in the Doctor Fell affair, no
doubt they would have said this, or something like it:

    "I love you, sir, I love you well;
    The reason why I cannot tell."

When supper was over that evening at Deacon Bissell's, the sun had
been down some time. The stars were beginning to peep out of their
hiding places, and the moon, who had shown her face a little before
the sun took his leave, had now grown bolder, and shone out brightly
and clearly, as if she were not afraid of anybody, and as if she had
some sort of a notion that she had got to be mistress.

"Well, children," said Captain Lovechild, "what are you going to drive
at next?"

Mrs. Bissell remarked that she thought it was almost time for them to
drive towards home, but said that she guessed the captain had
something to show them, and that they might stay just half an hour
longer.

Of course all the boys and girls flocked around the captain; and, sure
enough, he went into another room, and showed them one of the most
curious looking instruments, they all thought, that they had ever seen
in their lives.

"Oh, what is that, Captain Lovechild, and what is it for?" So the
children all asked, in nearly the same breath.

I suppose, indeed, I hope, that you are so much interested in my
story, that you have already had the same questions pass through your
mind; and I will answer your questions as the captain answered those
of his little friends. The instrument which the kind old gentleman had
brought with him all the way from Boston, on purpose to please and
instruct these children, was called a _telescope_. A telescope is a
long, hollow cylinder, with glasses in it. It is so made that when you
look through it, at anything a great way off, like the moon and the
stars, they appear a great deal larger. It seems to bring them near to
you. You can see them much more distinctly, and as you look at them,
you can find out many wonderful things about them.

As soon as the captain had got the instrument in order, he took it out
into the yard, and pointed one end of the long tube towards the moon.

    [Illustration: LOOKING THROUGH THE TELESCOPE.]

"Now, then," said he, "just take a peep at the moon. You'll see
something up there, which will make you wonder, or I'm very much
mistaken. One at a time."

And the children, who did not need to be urged much, gathered around
the lower end of the telescope, first one, and then another, until
they had all got a peep at the wonderful things in the moon. I can't
tell you how much they were delighted. It would fill a small volume,
if I should set down all their "ohs," and their "ahs," and everything
else which came rattling out of their mouths, while they were looking
through the telescope. But I will tell you what Samuel Bissell said,
though. I will tell you one thing he said, at all events. After he had
looked through the instrument, and had listened to what the old
gentleman said about the moon, and the planets, and the fixed stars,
"I declare," said he, "I don't know anything. _I'll be somebody_, I'll
know something and do something, if I live."

Samuel, as you will perceive, had his little head so full of the
wonders of the heavens, and had such a strong desire to add to his
stock of knowledge, that he used pretty bold language. He did not
say, "I'll _try_ to be somebody," as he might have said, if he had
studied his speech a little. His head was full, so that his words
burst out from his mouth as the water would burst out of a hole in the
dam. Yes, and his _heart_ spoke, too, as well as his _head_. More
sincere and honest words never dropped from his lips.

A new light dawned on that youth's mind, that evening. From the moment
that he uttered the resolution that he would "be somebody," he labored
to gather a large harvest of knowledge; to be something more than a
mere cipher in the world; to act his part well.

"And did he succeed?" you are ready to ask. I should have to get ahead
of my story to answer the question. But one thing I will say here:
that if a boy makes up his mind, deliberately and firmly, that he will
climb up to some high point on the hill of science, and that he will
be respected and honored among his fellows--if he brings his hands,
and his head, and his heart to the task, and goes ahead, through thick
and thin, not turning out of his path, however he may be tempted to do
so, he is almost sure to succeed in reaching what he aims at; that
is, if his life is spared and his health does not give out. I have
great faith in a strong will, a clear head, right principles, a good
stock of patience, and a steady disposition to go ahead. Some boys,
when you talk to them about doing something and being something,
always throw a bucket of cold water over you by saying, "There are so
many difficulties," or, "If I were only in such a boy's place!" Well,
you may always be sure that such cowards will never do anything or be
anything worth mentioning; for it is not very common for people to
accomplish much by _accident_, and these little chaps, should they
ever succeed at all, would have to blunder into their success.

After hearing this anecdote of Samuel, you will not wonder that, some
years after this resolution was made, when he heard of his father's
loss, he played the part of a hero. I will tell you about that in
another chapter.

    [Illustration: "WHAT WILL BECOME OF YOU?"]




CHAP. VII.

A TALK ABOUT THE FUTURE.


"Samuel," said his father, a few days after he learned that he was a
bankrupt, "I don't know what is to become of you. I've lost all the
property I had. I'm not worth a red cent."

"I guess I can take care of myself, father," said the lad. "Don't
worry about that."

"Why, what can you do, Samuel?"

"Not much of anything now, I suppose--anything which will put dollars
and cents into my pocket--but I can learn, if I can get a chance."

"And what would you like to do for a living?"

"There are a good many things which I would like to do," said Samuel,
"and may be I shall do them some day; but I've been thinking that just
now, I had better go to work in the factory."

"What! in the cotton factory?"

"Yes, sir, Mr. Mason's."

"But would you like that kind of work?"

"I don't know, sir, I'm sure; I should like to try, at any rate. I
should like to do something."

He did try. That very week, Samuel got a place in Mr. Mason's factory.
His wages were not great, at first. But he earned more than enough to
pay for his board at once, and in a month or two he did much better
than that. Samuel had to work hard, though. The factory bell rang at
day-break, and he was obliged to get up and work an hour or more
before breakfast. All day long, from early morning till evening, and
in the winter season, till nine o'clock at night, he was required to
be at work, with the exception of the time--and that was rather
brief--allotted to meals. It was a very rare thing that the boys in
the factory had a holiday. Sunday, to be sure--they had that to
themselves. But most of the boys, it is to be hoped, were too well
brought up and too conscientious to devote any part of that day to
play and amusement.

Once in a great while, however, "like angels' visits, few and far
between," came a holiday. They have a great time, you know, in every
part of the good old commonwealth of Massachusetts, when the day of
the annual thanksgiving comes. Very few people, old or young, think of
doing much business on that day.

    [Illustration]




CHAP. VIII.

THANKSGIVING AND TEMPTATION.


Well, in process of time, that long looked for festival arrived. No
boy in Meadville had to sleep with an eye open that morning, for fear
he would not hear the first accent of the tongue of the factory bell.
The bell slept; and the boys slept, too, until they were called to
breakfast.

Samuel had not become very intimate with many of the factory boys.
Indeed, among them all, there was only one that he cared a great deal
about associating with; and this one he loved as a brother. The name
of this boy--or rather, the name by which I prefer to call him in this
narrative--was Frederick Noble. Frederick and Samuel, when they were
not in the factory, were half their time together. I hardly know what
made them so much attached to each other; though probably one reason
was that the circumstances of the two were somewhat similar.
Frederick's father, as well as Samuel's, had once been a man of
property, but, like Mr. Bissell, had become comparatively poor.
There's no accounting for likes and dislikes, though. Samuel and
Frederick were fond of each other, and I presume it would have puzzled
either of them to tell the reason for this fondness.

These two boys, according to an arrangement which had been made a long
time beforehand, were companions on thanksgiving day. If I remember
aright, the governor's proclamation for thanksgiving, at the time when
Frederick and Samuel were boys together, used to have these words
tacked to the last end of it: "All servile labor and vain recreation
on said day are by law forbidden." Still, parents and guardians
allowed considerable latitude to the children in their amusements, if
the governor did not. It was pretty generally understood that the
young folks were to have a good time of it, on thanksgiving day.

It very often happens, that when we enjoy ourselves most--when we come
nearest to being perfectly happy--we encounter the strongest
temptations, or, what amounts to the same thing, we are induced to
yield to temptation.

Several times during the day, these two boys came very near doing
something which they would have been ashamed of and heartily sorry for
afterwards. They met some boys playing cards for small sums of money,
and were urged to "try their luck." At first, they thought they would,
"just for fun." But they finally concluded that fun of that sort was
rather too dangerous--that it would cost more than it would come
to--and so they passed on.

About a hundred rods from the village, in an orchard, our two friends
came across a company of larger boys, who were playing ball. Here
they encountered another temptation. The ball-players were treating
themselves to a kind of liquor, which, in those parts, bore the name
of _egg-nog_. Some of the boys and girls who read this story, or hear
it read, will no doubt laugh at this unmusical and out-of-the-way
name; and I confess the word looked to me so strange and barbarous,
after I had written it down, that I had a great mind to dash my pen
across it, and hunt up some other name for it. However, I concluded I
would go straight to Webster's large dictionary, and see whether he
had taken notice of the word. I made up my mind that, if I found it
in the dictionary, I would hold on to it, and that if it were missing
there, I would let it stay in the society where it was born,
christened and brought up. I went to the dictionary, and there I found
the word, looking, for all the world, as if it were vastly at home.

"Egg-nog," says Doctor Webster, "a drink used in America, consisting
of the yelks of eggs beaten up with sugar, and the whites of eggs
whipped, with the addition of wine or spirits." The addition which
Webster speaks of, and which consisted of _spirits_ when I was a boy,
and not of _wine_, you will please to take notice, was considered a
very important addition, without which the liquor would be worthless.

Well, Samuel and Frederick, though they were strongly urged to "taste
of the nice egg-nog," and though they almost wished that they might so
far gratify their curiosity as to taste of it, succeeded in resisting
the temptation, and letting the stuff alone. Neither of them drank a
drop of it; though I should not wonder if they found it rather hard
work to refuse.

My young friend, perhaps you think these facts are hardly worth
noticing. But I look upon them in a very different light. These boys,
in my opinion, gained great victories that day--victories quite as
worthy of praise and honor as those of Alexander and Caesar. They had
the courage to _do right_, when they were tempted to _do wrong_. They
did right. And they had their reward, no doubt, when they heard the
voice of conscience in their own bosoms, whispering, "Well done."




CHAP. IX.

PATRIOTISM AND POWDER.


It was more than six months after the thanksgiving festival, before
the factory boys had another holiday. Time, who never stands still a
moment, went on, and by and by, the Fourth of July came round. Samuel
and Frederick were companions on that day, as well as on the preceding
thanksgiving festival. The first thing they did, after they got up in
the morning--for they were wakened very early by the ringing of all
the bells in Meadville, not excepting the one on the factory, which
was keyed on a very high note, and was cracked in the bargain, though
it made up in zeal and earnestness what it lacked in depth and
sweetness--the first thing they did was to climb the hill that
overlooked the village, where the men were firing a salute in honor of
the day. There seems to be something in the smell of gunpowder, and
the sound of a huge-mouthed cannon, which wakes up a good deal of
patriot feeling in the breast of a child.

How my little heart, when it was not much bigger than a chipping
squirrel's, used to throb with patriotism--or something else, for I am
not so sure that it was patriotism, after all--while I heard the rusty
old cannon that did duty at Willow Lane, booming out its sentiments
about matters and things in general, and the declaration of American
independence in particular. As long ago as I can remember, I know the
sound of a drum almost overturned the little sense I had. Oh, what a
quantity of martial spirit was set in motion in my brain, when, as it
sometimes happened, I got a chance to beat on that drum myself--to
beat on it with both hands, "like a trainer." It was one of the
proudest achievements of my childhood, I do believe--that performance
on the drum--the real drum, the identical one which the "trainers"
used.

It is not quite so with me, now-a-days. You may wonder why. I almost
wonder why myself. But so it is. The deafening roar of cannon, the
racket of a thousand muskets, the clatter of junior drums, and the
thunder of senior ones, have not _such_ a moving effect on me as they
used to have. They _move me out of the way_ now. That is about all.
I suppose, if the truth was known, I dislike _war_ more than I did
when I was a child. War seems a terrible thing to me, whenever I think
of it. I cannot bear the thought that hostile men should meet each
other on the field of battle, and use all the art they are masters of,
in trying to kill each other.

    [Illustration: THE YOUNG DRUMMER.]

But enough of this. Children, as I was saying, love to hear the noise
of the cannon. It stirs up the embers of their patriotism, or fills
them with some other kind of fire. We will not stop now to inquire
very particularly as to the nature of the blaze. Our two friends felt
as if there was a young Vesuvius burning in their bosoms, as they
listened to the sound of the cannon. Frederick especially, was quite
beside himself. War had completely turned his head. Oh, how he longed
to be a soldier. I am not sure but he almost wished some nation or
other would pick a quarrel with us, so that he might have a chance to
shoulder his musket, and start right off, and fight the battles of his
country. Like a great many other children, he saw only one side of
war, and that was its bright side. He heard no groans from dying men,
no whizzing of cannon balls past his ears. He saw no river of blood
flowing from human veins. He had lost no limb of his own; he was in
danger of losing none. I hardly think he had read the poetical
confessions of a young hero just returned from the wars. Did you ever
read them, my friend? They are worth reading, and I will quote them
for you:

    "My father was a farmer good,
      With corn and beef in plenty.
    I mowed, and hoed, and held the plow
      And longed for one and twenty;
    For I had quite a martial turn,
      And scorned the lowing cattle;
    I burned to wear a uniform,
      Hear drums, and see a battle.

    "My birth-day came; my father urged,
      But stoutly I resisted;
    My sister wept, my mother prayed,
      But off I went, and 'listed.
    They marched me on through wet and dry,
      To tunes more loud than charming,
    But lugging knapsack, box and gun,
      Was harder work than farming.

    "We met the foe--the cannons roared--
      The crimson tide was flowing--
    The frightful death-groans filled my ears--
      I wished that I was mowing.
    I lost my leg--the foe came on--
      They had me in their clutches--
    I starved in prison till the peace,
      Then hobbled home on crutches."

This young hero gives the other and darker side of war, you see. There
is reality in what the poor fellow says, if he does tell his story in
rather a humorous vein. I tell you what it is, little friend, there is
nothing good in war. It is a terrible thing; and though I don't
pretend to say that it is never necessary, I consider it one of the
worst curses with which a nation is ever visited--worse than
pestilence, worse than famine. That is the reason why I do not quite
like to see boys so fond of war, and so full of the war spirit.

But we must proceed with the story.




CHAP. X.

THE GLASS OF GIN.


Soon after breakfast was over that morning, Samuel and his companion
strolled out into the village. None but those who are kept constantly
at work in a close room, almost every day in the year, except Sunday,
can imagine with what light hearts these two boys walked the streets
of that factory village, on the morning of that memorable holiday. I
say memorable. It proved to be a day which neither of these boys could
well forget.

As they passed along through the village in the course of the
forenoon, they saw a great many sights, which to their young eyes,
were worth going a great way to see. There were tents erected on the
square in front of the meeting house--tents in which there were scores
of eatable and drinkable things to sell. In one of these tents, there
was a boy, who seemed very much at home, dealing out candies, and
filberts, and raisins, and gingerbread, and liquors of different
kinds. There were a dozen different bottles and decanters in his tent,
each with some sort of liquor in it.

"Hurrah!" said he, as soon as the two friends came up to the tent;
"why, Fred, is that you?" And he wrung Frederick's hand much as a
farmer is accustomed to wring the necks of fat chickens, a day or two
before Christmas or Thanksgiving.

It turned out that the youth who was so glad to see Frederick, was
Peter Pippin, a son of the butcher in the place where Frederick's
father lived. Peter was a rude, untutored boy, rough as a nutmeg
grater, or a chestnut bur. He and Frederick had been to school
together; and though they had never been very intimate, because their
tastes were so different, they had been sufficiently acquainted to be
really glad to see each other again, after a separation of more than a
year.

"Bless me!" said Peter--_Pete_ he was always called at school, but we
will give him all that belongs to him, for that is nothing to boast
of--"bless me! how you have grown, Fred. 'Pon my soul, I'm glad to see
you. Come, take something to drink. What'll you have? and that chap
there with you, what'll you have, my beauty?"

This coarse language grated a good deal on Samuel's ears, and it was
by no means pleasant to Frederick; but it did not affect both boys in
exactly the same way. The former was so much disgusted, that, after
thanking the butcher's boy for his invitation, he was hurrying away as
fast as possible. The latter, while he did not care a straw for the
liquor, felt kindly towards his former schoolfellow, and was rather
disposed to gratify him by at least going through the ceremony of
drinking.

Frederick is on dangerous ground now. But he had been on dangerous
ground before, you recollect. He got off the rocks then. Let us hope
he will now. But Freddy, you must look out. As the sailor says, when
he is looking out at the mast head, and when he sees the vessel is
driving rapidly towards the surf, "breakers ahead!" There is
temptation here. To be sure, it is not so strong, but he can overcome
it. How easily he resisted a similar temptation on Thanksgiving day.
The result of that day's adventures shows that he can get along safely
enough, if he will only look out for himself. But _will_ he look out
for himself? We shall see.

"Hadn't we better walk along, Fred?" asked Samuel, in a kind and
pleasant tone of voice.

"Not quite yet, if you please," said Frederick.

"Come, say what you'll have, Fred! Take a pull at this 'ere old
Jamaky? The real critter, Fred, the real critter--none of your Boston
pisin stuff. Or what do you say to a double and twisted horn of brandy
what's jist come from France?"

Fred hesitated. Strange enough that he should hesitate. Was he
charmed, as a bird is said to be charmed by a black snake, so that he
could not move?

"It is time to be off, Fred. Take my advice, and come along," said
Samuel.

"You little chicken-hearted baby!" Peter broke in, "hold your tongue,
if you don't want it pulled out by the roots."

"Wait half a minute," said Frederick to his companion. "Peter, pray
don't talk so to Samuel. He is one of the best fellows that ever
lived."

"Well, he ain't worth minding, any how. Come, now, are you going to
drink or not? Take some punch? That's the stuff. There ain't no spirit
in it hardly. Or may be you'll have some gin."

And the butcher's boy poured out a glass half full of gin and water,
and passed it to Frederick, while he took good care to prepare another
glass for himself. Peter drank. _So did Frederick_--not because he
loved the liquor, but because he was good-natured. He did it to oblige
his former school-fellow. I said he did it because he was
good-natured. I ought rather to have said, perhaps, that it was
because he had not courage enough to do right. I am not sure but that
is a more correct reason than the other.

Poor Frederick! From the moment he drank that glass of gin, he felt
unhappy. All day long he thought of what he had done, and it robbed
him of all his peace.

"But never mind, Fred," said his companion, "you are sorry you did it,
and you will never drink any more. Let that comfort you."

I will drop the thread of Frederick's history here, for the present.
Perhaps I may take it up again, though, by and by. The reason I have
given any sketch at all of this boy's adventures, I frankly confess
it, is that by comparing him with Samuel, and noticing where he
stumbled, and how he stumbled, you might learn exactly what those
traits of character were by which the latter was able to get over the
difficulties he met with, and to resist the temptations that
surrounded him.




CHAP. XI.

LIFE IN A FACTORY.


Have you ever been inside of a cotton factory, reader? If so, you need
not be told what sort of a place it is. I remember very well how I
felt the first time I went into a spinning room. What a whirl of
little wheels and great wheels, of bobbins and spindles, of drums and
cylinders, there was in that room. My brain seemed to go round with
the wheels; and I could hardly help holding my head with both hands,
to keep it in its place. What a clatter was kept up by some of the
machinery. What a dull, droning, hum-drum sound there was, besides. I
could not hear the sound of my own voice, there was such a racket; and
such a dense fog settled upon my mind, on account of the noise, that I
could scarcely tell whether I was in the body or out of the body. Of
all the places in the world, that ever I had seen or heard of, or ever
expected to see or hear of, I firmly believed that the worst place for
a boy to live, day after day, was in the spinning room of a cotton
factory. I had heard of dismal dungeons, in which the light of day
never shone; and I had thought that they were bad enough. But this
factory seemed a great deal worse than any dungeon that was ever
invented. The factory would drive me crazy in a week. I was sure of
that. In the dungeon, on the other hand, which, though it might be as
dark as tar, was still and quiet, I fancied I could at least keep my
senses.

A factory is a busy place, too. It is one of the last situations in
the world where a lazy person would wish to be employed. You can't be
lazy there, if you try. A horse might as well undertake to be lazy in
a treadmill. Some people think that factory boys and factory girls
have to work _too_ hard; that they are confined too many hours a day,
and that they don't get fresh air enough. As to that, I shall not set
myself up for a judge. Very likely the children fare better in some
factories than they do in others. I will say, though, that the task of
a factory boy, were the factory ever so well managed, would not be so
pleasant to me as many others. I will say this; and I ought to say,
besides, that when a boy gets _used_ to the noise of a factory, he
does not mind it much. Though it almost deafens him at first, he
almost forgets there is any noise after a while.

Our young friend, the peddler's boy, made up his mind, the first day
he went to work in Mr. Mason's factory, that he _would_ like the
business, whether or no. Well, he did like it, after a week or
two--that is, he was content with it, and he was as cheerful and happy
in the factory as he had been out of it. Contentment, my dear young
friends, is a gem. It is worth more than gold or diamonds. You can't
buy it with gold or diamonds, and if you should ever happen to get
hold of it, you would be foolish to part with it, for all the gold in
California and all the pearls in the tower of London. I have often
thought, that if the apostle Paul were to be envied for anything, it
might be for the contented spirit which he had, after he got to be an
old man. "I have learned," said he, "in whatsoever state I am,
therewith to be content." What a precious lesson! I wish you would try
to learn it, reader. You can learn it. You ought to learn it. Set
yourself about the task, then, at once.

Samuel Bissell was content with his factory life. It was not quite so
pleasant as some others were. He could not help seeing that. But he
did not spend his time or any part of his time in wishing he was
somewhere else, doing some other kind of business. He did not say or
sing, "There's a good time coming, boys." The good time _had come_,
according to his notion. Still, he held on to that resolution--the
resolution he formed when he got a glimpse of some of the wonders away
off in the blue sky. If you had watched him during the few leisure
hours he had, you would have seen that he had not forgotten that old
text of his, "I'll be somebody." Many and many a time, after he got
home from the factory at night, he would go to his little room, and
spend an hour or two reading and thinking. There was a small library
in the village where he lived, and by paying a small sum every week,
he was allowed to read some very valuable books. With what eagerness
he picked up every kernel of knowledge he could find about the sun,
and the planets, and the stars. When most of the boys were playing in
the streets, he was reading and studying in his chamber. While he was
a factory boy, he learned from the books which fell into his hands, to
dive a great deal deeper into the heart of many studies than he was
taught to do in the school to which his father had sent him. He had
become quite a master of the art of book-keeping; and as to geography
and astronomy, I am not sure but he could have told some things about
them which his former teacher never dreamed of.




CHAP. XII.

A GLANCE AT FREDERICK.


Before I wind up my story, I have a good mind to go back, and tell you
what became of that companion of our friend, the Peddler's Boy, who
drank the glass of gin. Poor Frederick! It makes my heart sad, to
think what he might have been, and what he was. He was as kind, and
amiable, and industrious, and prudent, as Samuel. His habits were as
good, too, for aught that I know, up to the time when he was so
thoughtless and foolish as to yield to the wishes of that coarse and
wicked boy. He had been as well brought up as Samuel. Good principles
had been as carefully sown in his mind. There was, then, there could
have been no general reason why he did not show himself more of a hero
when he met his old schoolmate.

How foolish it was for Frederick to taste that liquor. He did not love
gin. He disliked the taste of it. Moreover, he knew well enough that
it was wrong to taste it, and I presume he saw clearly enough, at the
time, that he was making a little dunce of himself. Why did he not run
away, if he could not resist temptation while he stayed there? Why,
when Samuel reminded him, so kindly, that it was time for them to go,
did he not go along about his business? How foolish it was for him to
stay and drink that dram, which tasted to him, I dare say, almost as
bad as a dose of salts? Oh, if he had only had more courage, more
principle! But there he failed--and his failure cost him dearly!

Samuel, you will recollect, tried to console him, after he had drank
the glass of gin, to please Peter, by telling him that he was sure he
would never do so again. But Samuel, it appeared afterwards, was too
hopeful, too charitable. Frederick did drink again. How long it was
after that holiday, before he did so, I don't know. Nor is it much
matter. It is sufficient to know, that when a like temptation was
placed before him again, he had less power to resist it than he had
before. He drank again, and it was not many months before he liked
dram-drinking as well as any of the boys in the factory.

However, Frederick had friends in the city; and when he was about
twenty-one years of age, some of these friends got him a good place as
a clerk in a wholesale grocery store. He seemed to "turn over a new
leaf," when he went to Boston to live. If he drank any--and I suppose
he did a little--his habit did not grow much stronger, and he was a
very faithful clerk.

After a year or two, he did so well, that his friends loaned him
money, and he went into business for himself. For a year or two he did
well, and was prosperous. His credit was good. His business increased.
There was no reason why he should not continue to prosper. None, did
I say? There was one. His love for dram-drinking grew stronger, after
a while, and he drank more and more. Not that he ever got absolutely
drunk; but it was not an uncommon thing for him to get _high_, as they
sometimes say of the first stages of drunkenness--so high that he
talked and acted very like a fool.

A habit of this kind is apt to grow upon a person. It grew upon
Frederick. I will not trace his path, through all its windings, from
tasting to moderate drinking, from moderate drinking to drunkenness,
and from drunkenness to ruin. But such was his course. He drank till
he entirely lost the power of controlling his appetite. His business
affairs got out of order, and they became worse and worse. He failed.
Not long after this, he was often seen reeling about the streets of
Boston, a poor, miserable, drunken wretch.

One night, when he was drunk, some one who knew him, ordered a
carriage, and took him to the neat little cottage which was the home
of his childhood. His aged parents were already aware, to some extent,
of Frederick's habits; but when they saw there, before their eyes,
that living wreck of what was once their son, it seemed as if their
hearts would break with anguish. That night they said not a word to
their son. They knew that he was not himself, and that anything he
might say then, would only add to their grief.

    [Illustration: THE DRUNKARD AND HIS FATHER.]

The next day, however, after the reason of their miserable son had
been partly restored, they had a long talk with him. He knew to what a
depth he had fallen. But he declared, over and over again, that there
was no hope for him. "I am lost!" said he; "I am lost! Father," he
continued, "I am drinking up my soul, and no power on earth can stop
me. I could no more live without liquor, than a fish can live out of
water. I am on fire, and nothing will help to quench the flames, but
the liquor which feeds them."

Then he told the old man the story of that first glass of gin. "It was
that," said he, "which has done all the mischief. If I had not played
the fool then, I might have been somebody now. But I yielded to
temptation. I formed the taste for liquor. It has grown upon me, until
I am the loathsome beast that you see before you. No, I never can
stop drinking until I die."

Poor, poor man! in less than three weeks after this interview with his
parents, he died--died of that most terrible disease, the delirium
tremens.

My young friends, before I leave this story of Frederick, let me urge
you to beware of the first glass. I don't care whether it is gin, or
rum, or brandy. Don't touch it. If you are tempted to drink, be a
hero. Have courage to say "No, I'll not throw myself away. I think too
much of myself for that."




CHAP. XIII.

SAMUEL IN BOSTON.


Time wore away. The peddler's boy, when he made up his mind to go to
work in the factory, did not expect to spend his days there. He
purposed to enter the factory because he thought that that was the
best thing he could do _then_. You will recollect that he said to his
father, when the old gentleman asked him what he would like to do,
that there were a great many things which he should _like_ to do, and
that may be he would do them some day; but that as he could not do
them _then_, he thought he would go to work in the factory, and wait
until he could do them. Samuel, at length, began to think that it was
time for him to look for some other business a little more to his mind
than what he was doing then. So thought the good old peddler, his
father. His mother--alas! she had gone to her rest--her smiling face
had long been missed in the little cottage where she had dwelt so many
years. It was decided that Samuel should go to Boston. But what was
he to do there? That question gave others more anxiety than it gave
Samuel. "I don't know, to be sure," said he, "exactly what I'll find
to do. But I know I'll do _something_. I'll shovel dirt, if I can't
get anything else to do, and I can make a living at that."

He went to Boston. The first thing he did, after he got there, was to
walk straight to the house of Captain Lovechild. The captain was at
home, and glad to see him.

"Do you remember," the boy asked, "when you came to our house, a
great while ago, and brought your telescope with you?"

"Yes," the old man replied, "and I remember, too, how a certain little
fellow got almost crazy when he looked through the instrument, at the
moon and stars, and when I told him something about them."

"And do you remember _what_ you said?"

"No, I'm sure I don't."

"Well, I do, as plainly as if you had said it but yesterday; and it
was what you said about living to some purpose, and having a high aim,
and being governed by high principles, that put a new soul into me."

"And made you talk so largely?"

Samuel colored. "I was a foolish little creature, I suppose," he said.

"No, not a bit of it," said the captain, grasping the young man's
hand, "not a bit of it. I was glad to hear you say what you did. I've
thought of it a thousand times since, and I have said to myself, 'That
chap will make something, if he lives, see if he don't.'"

"Well, he _hasn't_ made anything yet."

The captain laughed. "I don't quite agree with you," he said. "But,
let that be as it may, you are young yet, and the great pyramid and
St. Peter's church were not built in a minute. Sam, what are you now?"

"A poor, green factory boy."

"Who is trying to do his duty, and sometimes asks God to help him; who
is wide awake and ambitious; who has got a pretty good head and not a
very bad heart; who will push his way in the world and be somebody?"

"I don't know about all that."

"Nor I, but I know some things about you--more than you dream of, I
guess."

Samuel colored again, and tried to stammer out something, but
succeeded only tolerably well.

"You want something to do, don't you?" the old man asked.

"Yes, sir," said the peddler's boy, "that is what I came to Boston
for."

"Well, let me think a moment," said the good old gentleman. He did
think a moment, and then he put on his hat, and got the gold-headed
cane which he cut on the island of Malta, where Paul was cast away,
and off he posted with his young friend. He knew what he was about. He
had not been thinking for nothing. After walking some ten or fifteen
minutes, he went into a store on Commercial wharf, and asked one of
the partners of the house, whom he seemed to know very well, if they
did not want a clerk. The answer was that they did not need another
clerk, but that they were very much in want of a good porter.

"Well, here's the chap," said the captain, pointing to Samuel. "Sam,
what do you say to that?"

Samuel was inclined to try the business, and in less than half an
hour, the terms were arranged, and the young lad was at work.




CHAP. XIV.

THE FLOUR STORE.


The men with whom Samuel had found a place, were large flour dealers.
Their new porter pleased them. He, too, was pleased with his business.
Nothing could be more pleasant for me now, than to relate to you
scores of little incidents connected with Samuel's history, while he
was in that store. But if I do that, I fear I shall spin out my thread
so long that you will get weary. I will tell you a few things,
though.

It was Samuel's daily duty to sweep out the store. This task he
performed early in the morning, before either of the partners or any
of the clerks were at their posts. One morning, the first thing he
saw, after opening the store, was a roll of bank bills, lying on the
floor. He took it up, and unrolled it. There were some ten or twelve
dollars in it. As soon as the book-keeper came to the store, Samuel
handed him the roll of bank bills, and went about his work. That was a
small matter, wasn't it? But small as it was, those flour merchants,
when they heard of it, noted it down in their memory.

Months passed. The book-keeper went into business for himself. A new
book-keeper was needed to take his place. Samuel was talked of. "But
can Samuel be depended upon?" it was asked. "Can we trust him? Is he
faithful, and honest, and capable?" I don't know what decision they
would have come to, if it had not been for the affair of the bank
bills. But his honesty in that particular was brought up. They thought
it would do to trust a young man who could resist such a temptation
as that. There was another thing they had heard about Samuel, which
they thought pretty good evidence that he was honest. It was this:
While Samuel was in the factory, he bought some articles at the
village store. After he had paid for them, and got away a little
distance, he found that the clerk had made a mistake in giving change,
and that he had in his pocket fifty cents more than belonged to him.
So he turned right around, went back to the store, and returned the
money to the clerk.

"He's the man," they all said, as soon as these facts were stated. So
Samuel became the book-keeper in that large house, with a salary four
times as large as he had received while he was the porter.

Some two or three years from the time he went to Boston to live,
Samuel Bissell was one of the partners in that wealthy firm. He is by
no means an old man now. Indeed, he is in the very prime of life. But
he has got to be a rich man, and now owns one of the most beautiful
country seats within a dozen miles of Boston, where he resides with
his family. A great many merchants are so much engaged in making
money, that they seem to care hardly anything about improving the
mind, and so they let that get all full of weeds. But Mr. Bissell did
very differently. He spent a great part of the time which he could
spare from his business, in gathering new sheaves of knowledge, and
cultivating the garden of the heart.

I hardly know of a man for miles around, in that charming district of
country, who is more respected and beloved than Samuel Bissell. When I
saw him last, he had just been elected the second time to a seat in
the legislature of the State. I think he is a member of the Senate
now.

I wish you could visit his place in the country, and see his fine
garden and fine house. If you ever should happen that way, and should
learn where he lives, you must not fail to make him a visit, and to
tell him that Uncle Frank asked you to call. You will see there one of
the happiest families that you ever came across in your life. Mr.
Bissell sometimes amuses his children with stories about his boyhood,
and they are perfectly delighted with these stories.

    [Illustration: MR. BISSELL AND HIS CHILDREN.]

Don't forget to inquire for the good old peddler, as soon as you
get into the house. "What! is he living yet?" To be sure he is, and
Samuel has fitted up for him one of the pleasantest rooms in the whole
house. His hair is very white, and he was very feeble when I saw him
last. But his heart was as young as ever; and he laughed, and played,
and frolicked with his grandchildren just as merrily as if he had been
a child himself.

Another thing I must tell you, while I think of it. There is a cupola
on the top of Samuel's house, and I want you should go into that, if
you can get a chance. There you will see quite a number of things
which are worth seeing. One of them, perhaps, when you come to know
what it is, will interest you more than all the rest. It is the very
telescope which used to belong to Captain Lovechild, and which made
Samuel's heart throb so, when he was a child--"put a new soul" into
him, to use his own language. The old gentleman, some time since, left
this world, I trust for a better and a happier one. Just before he
died, he made a will, in which he remembered many of his friends, and
Samuel, among the rest, to whom he gave the old telescope. Mr.
Bissell has more than once been heard to say, that he would not part
with that telescope for a good farm.

    [Illustration]




CHAP. XV.

THE WINDING UP.


If I should undertake to tell my readers what lessons this story
teaches, I am not sure but they would laugh at me. I fancy I see their
bright eyes twinkle, as I begin to talk about these lessons, and I
almost hear them say to one another, that Uncle Frank might as well
carry a lantern in broad daylight, as to spend his time in telling us
what this story teaches. Some of them wonder, perhaps, if Uncle Frank
really takes his readers for a set of little dunces.

Well, then, my shrewd little boy, what does the story teach?

"Why it teaches that the Peddler's Boy set out to be somebody, and he
was somebody."

Very well. Anything else, little girl? I must catechise you a little.
What do you learn from it?

"That anybody can do anything he sets out to do, and that he can be
anything he sets out to be."

Bravo! that is pretty well, only a little too strong. And what else?
Why didn't Frederick get along in the world as well as Samuel?

"Because he was a coward."

I'm not sure but you are half right. It seems hard to call that poor,
unfortunate youth a coward. But I do honestly think that he would have
done well enough, if he had only scraped together a few more grains of
courage. Look at that affair of the glass of gin. It was courage that
he wanted there--courage to do right, no matter what his old playmate
might say or think. He was afraid to offend the boy. He had more fear
of the boy, it would appear, than he had of God. What that coarse,
profane boy said, had more weight with him than the words which his
conscience uttered. It was _principle_, after all, that he lacked. And
so he was led away, and lost.

"Uncle Frank, I shall never forget what one glass will do."

I hope you never will; and I hope you will remember, too, as long as
you live, that the success of the Peddler's Boy was owing quite as
much to his honesty, and temperance, and faithfulness, and
religion--for he was a sincere and devoted Christian--as to his
ambition, and industry, and energy, and resolution.

    [Illustration: THE END]




_Woodworth's Juvenile Works._

PHILLIPS, SAMPSON & CO.

PUBLISH THE FOLLOWING JUVENILE WORKS,

By Francis C. Woodworth,

     EDITOR OF "WOODWORTH'S YOUTH'S CABINET," AUTHOR OF "THE
     WILLOW LANE BUDGET," "THE STRAWBERRY GIRL," "THE MILLER OF
     OUR VILLAGE," "THEODORE THINKER'S TALES," ETC., ETC.

UNCLE FRANK'S BOYS' AND GIRLS' LIBRARY.

A Beautiful Series, comprising six volumes., square 12mo., with eight
Tinted Engravings in each volume. The following are their titles
respectively:

   I. THE PEDDLER'S BOY, or I'll Be Somebody.
  II. THE DIVING BELL, or Pearls to be Sought For
 III. THE POOR ORGAN-GRINDER, and other stories.
  IV. LOSS AND GAIN, or Susy Lee's Motto.
   V. MIKE MARBLE; His Crotchets and Oddities.
  VI. THE WONDERFUL LETTER-BAG OF KIT CURIOUS.

     "Of those who have the gift to write for children, Mr.
     Woodworth stands among the first; and what is best of all,
     with the ability to adapt himself to the wants and
     comprehension of children, he has that high moral
     principle, which will permit nothing to leave his pen that
     can do harm."--_Arthur's Home Gaz._

     "We never pen a notice with more pleasure than when any
     work of our friend Mr. Woodworth is the subject. Whatever
     he does is well done, and in a sweet and gentle
     spirit."--_Christ. Inquirer._

     "The author is a man of fine abilities and refined taste,
     and does his work in a spirit of vivacious, but most
     truthful earnestness."--_Ladies Repos._

  WOODWORTH'S STORIES ABOUT ANIMALS. 12mo., with Illuminated Title,
    and upwards of Fifty Beautiful Engravings; pp. 336.

  WOODWORTHS'S STORIES ABOUT BIRDS. Uniform with the above. With
    Sixty Splendid Engravings.

     These two volumes, containing characteristic anecdotes,
     told in a brief and pleasing vein, are among the most
     entertaining books of the kind to be found in the English
     language.

     "Attractive stories, told in a style of great liveliness
     and beauty."--_N.Y. Tribune._

     "A _melange_ of most agreeable reading."--_Presbyterian._

     "They cannot fail to be intensely interesting."--_Ch.
     Register._

     "Charming stories, told with that felicitous simplicity and
     eloquence of diction which characterize all Mr. Woodworth's
     efforts for the young."--_N.Y. Commercial Advertiser._

     "Nothing can be more interesting than the stories and
     pictorial illustrations of these works."--_Brattleborough
     Dem._


  UNCLE FRANK'S PEEP AT THE BEASTS. Square 12mo. Profusely
    Illustrated; pp. 160.

  UNCLE FRANK'S PEEP AT THE BIRDS. Uniform with the above.

     These two volumes are written in the simplest style, and
     with words, for the most part, of two or three syllables.
     They are exceedingly popular among children.

       *       *       *       *       *

    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Typographical errors corrected in text:                   |
    |                                                           |
    | Page  10: 'would have taken taken place'                  |
    |           replaced with 'would have taken place'          |
    | Page  23: backberries replaced with blackberries          |
    |                                                           |
    | Unusual words:                                            |
    |                                                           |
    | Page  86: yelks is a legitimate spelling variant of yolks |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *





End of Project Gutenberg's The Peddler's Boy, by Francis C. Woodworth

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PEDDLER'S BOY ***

***** This file should be named 33372.txt or 33372.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/3/7/33372/

Produced by Jeannie Howse, David Garcia and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The University of Florida, The Internet
Archive/Children's Library)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
