The Project Gutenberg EBook of Little Frankie at School, by Madeline Leslie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Little Frankie at School

Author: Madeline Leslie

Release Date: August 24, 2010 [EBook #33523]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE FRANKIE AT SCHOOL ***




Produced by Emmy and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
Archive/American Libraries.)









MRS. LESLIE'S BOOKS
FOR
LITTLE CHILDREN.

THE LITTLE FRANKIE SERIES.





BOOKS WRITTEN OR EDITED

By A. R. BAKER,

AND SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUESTION BOOKS on the Topics of Christ's Sermon on the Mount.

          VOL. I. FOR CHILDREN.  VOL. II. FOR YOUTH.
          VOL. III. FOR ADULTS.
          LECTURES ON THESE TOPICS, _in press_.


MRS. LESLIE'S SABBATH SCHOOL BOOKS.

          TIM, THE SCISSORS GRINDER.
          SEQUEL TO "TIM, THE SCISSORS GRINDER."
          PRAIRIE FLOWER.
          THE BOUND BOY.
          THE BOUND GIRL.
          VIRGINIA.
          THE TWO HOMES; OR, EARNING AND SPENDING.
          THE ORGAN-GRINDER, _in press_.


QUESTION BOOKS. The Catechism tested by the Bible.

          VOL. I. FOR CHILDREN.     VOL. II. FOR ADULTS.


THE DERMOTT FAMILY; or, Stories Illustrating the Catechism.

          VOL. I. DOCTRINES RESPECTING GOD AND MANKIND.
           "  II. DOCTRINES OF GRACE.
           " III. COMMANDMENTS OF THE FIRST TABLE.
           "  IV. COMMANDMENTS OF THE SECOND TABLE.
           "   V. CONDITIONS OF ETERNAL LIFE.


MRS. LESLIE'S HOME LIFE.

          VOL. I. CORA AND THE DOCTOR.
           "  II. COURTESIES OF WEDDED LIFE.
           " III. THE HOUSEHOLD ANGEL.


MRS. LESLIE'S JUVENILE SERIES.

          VOL. I. THE MOTHERLESS CHILDREN.
           "  II. PLAY AND STUDY.
           " III. HOWARD AND HIS TEACHER.
           "  IV. TRYING TO BE USEFUL.
           "   V. JACK, THE CHIMNEY SWEEPER.
           "  VI. THE YOUNG HOUSEKEEPER.
           " VII. LITTLE AGNES.


THE ROBIN REDBREAST SERIES.

          THE ROBINS' NEST.
          LITTLE ROBINS IN THE NEST.
          LITTLE ROBINS LEARNING TO FLY.
          LITTLE ROBINS IN TROUBLE.
          LITTLE ROBINS' FRIENDS.
          LITTLE ROBINS' LOVE ONE TO ANOTHER.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LITTLE FRANKIE SERIES.

          LITTLE FRANKIE AND HIS MOTHER.
          LITTLE FRANKIE AT HIS PLAYS.
          LITTLE FRANKIE AND HIS COUSIN.
          LITTLE FRANKIE AND HIS FATHER.
          LITTLE FRANKIE ON A JOURNEY.
          LITTLE FRANKIE AT SCHOOL.

[Illustration: FRANKIE WHEELING THE CRIPPLE.]





LITTLE

FRANKIE AT SCHOOL.

BY

MRS. MADELINE LESLIE,

          AUTHOR OF "THE HOME LIFE SERIES;" "MRS. LESLIE'S
          JUVENILE SERIES," ETC.

[Illustration: divider]

          BOSTON:
          CROSBY AND AINSWORTH,
          117 WASHINGTON STREET.




  Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1860, by
  A. R. BAKER,
  In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the District of
        Massachusetts.


  ELECTROTYPED AT THE
  BOSTON STEREOTYPE FOUNDRY.




LITTLE

FRANKIE AT SCHOOL.




CHAPTER I.

FRANKIE'S NEW TEACHER.


WHEN little Frankie Gray was nearly seven years old, a lady came to
reside in the town where he lived, hoping to collect a small school.

Frankie's mother called upon her, and was so much pleased with her
frank, cheerful manners, her sunny smile, and her Christian
conversation, that she promised, with her husband's consent, to send
Frankie and Nelly to be her pupils.

The young teacher's name was Fanny Grant. Nelly laughed merrily when she
heard it, and said she should always think of her great doll, Fanny,
when she saw her.

Papa had for a long time feared it was an injury to his wife to be
confined so many hours as she thought it necessary to be in order to
attend to the children's studies, and he was very glad to find a good
teacher for them.

Miss Grant hired a pleasant room in a house only a short distance from
Mr. Gray's. Then she commenced furnishing it to suit her own fancy.
First she fastened white shades to the windows, and then hung the walls
with bright colored maps, and large pictures of animals and birds. On
one side there was a nice blackboard, and next it a card containing the
alphabet in large letters.

When all this was arranged, Miss Grant engaged a carpenter to work for
her a day in making a gallery of four steps, and in drawing a large
circle on the floor, which he marked by driving in large brass headed
nails.

Nelly and her cousin, who had watched these arrangements with great
interest, were very curious to know their use. The teacher, smiling,
bade them wait and see.

"Is all ready now?" asked Frankie.

"Not quite," said the teacher. "I must have some small chairs for my
little scholars; also some more apparatus."

"What is apparatus?" inquired Nelly.

"It is any thing by which we can illustrate or explain our ideas. This
blackboard, and these cards, are apparatus. You will see, when school
begins, how I shall explain to you many things by their help. Then I
have a large globe, a numeral frame, and an orrery."

"I had an orrery once," shouted Frankie. "It was made of wire, with
potatoes and turnips. Is yours like that?"

"O, no," said the teacher, with a hearty laugh. "The planets are made of
wood, or plaster, and painted very prettily."

"I shall like to see it," said Frankie.

"So shall I," said Nelly.

The children then took their leave, after bidding the lady good by; but
presently Frankie returned, all out of breath, to say, "Miss Grant, I
have a whole box of beautiful great cards. They were my birthday present
from papa and mamma. You may take them, if you want to, and hang them
around the room."

"Thank you, my little friend," said the teacher, giving him a kiss. "I
am going now to my boarding place, and you may walk with me, if you can
stop until I put on my bonnet."

"I should like that," said Frankie. "I'll run out and tell Nelly to
wait."

Miss Grant locked the door, and taking a small vase in her hand, joined
the children who were waiting near the gate.

"What is that flower pot for?" asked Nelly.

"When school begins, I shall beg some flowers from the lady where I
live," answered the teacher. "I like to have the room look cheerful and
bright, so that the little scholars will like to be there."

"I wish Monday would come quick," exclaimed the boy. "I want to begin to
go to school. I mean to carry a great big bouquet, out of my own garden.
Did you know I had a garden, Miss Grant?"

"No, I did not; but I am very glad to hear it. I love flowers almost as
well as I do good little boys and girls."

"I should think you would love your mother better than either. I do."

Miss Grant's lip quivered, and tears gushed to her eyes. "I do love my
mother," she said, softly, "but she is in heaven."

"I'm real sorry," said the sympathizing child, affectionately kissing
the hand he held. "If you were little, like Nelly and me, mother would
let you be her daughter, I guess."

When the children reached home, Mrs. Gray was most happy to see what an
influence the young teacher had already established over them. She
encouraged their love for her, and appealed to their sympathies by
saying, "She is an orphan, without father or mother; we must all try to
make her forget her sorrows by showing her that she has still many warm
friends."




CHAPTER II.

ONE DAY AT SCHOOL.


I SUPPOSE you will wish to know how Frankie and Nelly liked their new
school, and whether they continued to love their teacher.

In answer to these questions, I shall give you an account of a day they
passed about a week after the school commenced.

It was a lovely morning in June. After breakfast and prayers in the
family of Mr. Gray, Frankie ran out into the garden to gather a bouquet
for his teacher. He and Nelly kept her vase well filled with flowers. He
put the bouquet into a pitcher of water to keep it fresh, and then ran
to the sink to wash his face and hands very clean; after which he went
into the nursery for Sally to pin on a clean collar, and to brush his
hair.

While she was doing this, he called out to his mother, who was in the
next room, "Mamma, mayn't I learn to part my hair myself? I'm almost
seven, you know."

"Yes, indeed," she answered. "You may learn as soon as you please. Sally
will show you how to hold the comb to make the parting straight."

"I wish my hair would lie down," exclaimed the boy, giving the brush a
quick, impatient jerk. It curls up so close, I can't make it look
smooth. And he brushed the front lock with all his strength.

"There, now, that looks well enough," said nurse in a comforting tone.
"You might as well try to keep the wind from blowing as to try to keep
your hair from curling. It will form little rings, do all you can."

"Now I'm ready!" shouted Frankie, taking his bouquet in his hand.

In the mean time, Nelly had been to her aunt's room, and had her long
hair combed out smoothly, and then brushed over the curling stick. It
was quite a tedious operation, and required to be very wet before the
comb could be passed through it; but Nelly bore it patiently, as her
aunt always tried to pass the time away agreeably, by giving her some
easy example in arithmetic, or hearing a line of the multiplication
table, or telling her a short story. By the time this was done, Sally
had turned the mattress; and the little girl made up her bed, laying on
the sheets and counterpane very smoothly, so that not a rumple could be
seen. Then she hung up such of her clothes as were lying about the room,
put her shoes into the bag on the inside of the closet door, then
dressed herself in a clean apron, and was ready, by the time Frankie
called, to take the flowers Willie had gathered for her, and walk out
with him to meet their dear teacher.

Sometimes, when they were early, they went as far as the house where she
boarded, and stood at the gate until she appeared; but generally they
sat down on the stone wall under the shade of the large maple tree at
the entrance to their avenue, and watched until she came in sight. Then
they ran eagerly to give her their morning kiss, and present their
little offering of flowers.

On this pleasant June morning, they each took a hand as usual, and
walked on rapidly toward the school, talking merrily as they went.

When they reached the building, they found nearly all the other
scholars, eighteen in number, waiting the arrival of Miss Grant. They
went into the school room, took off their hats and bonnets, hung them up
in the closet, and then went quietly to their seats on the steps, the
little ones on the lower steps, and the others above them on the higher.

When the church clock struck nine, the teacher rang the small bell,
when every eye was closed, and every head was bowed for prayer. The
little voices all joined in repeating the Lord's Prayer, after which
they sung a verse of the hymn,--

          "There is a happy land,
               Far, far away,
           Where saints in glory stand,
               Bright, bright as day."

After this, they pass down from the gallery, and march along to their
seats. For the next half hour the school is quite still, while the
pupils are studying the reading and spelling lessons: when the bell
strikes again, they march out in order to the front of the chair where
their teacher sits.

As soon as one class has recited, another is called, until every little
pupil has read and spelled.

When this has been done, every face begins to brighten, for they know
what the next exercise is; and they like it very much. The largest girl
takes her place on the circle, and the others follow her according to
their size, until they come down to the smallest one, who is a pretty
blue-eyed little urchin of four summers.

Miss Grant then strikes up a lively tune to the words,--

          "This is the way we wash our face,
           This is the way we wash our face,
           This is the way we wash our face,
                     So early in the morning,"--

each little hand is vigorously employed in rubbing the face, as they
merrily follow each other around the circle. As soon as they finish one
verse, they stop a moment, to avoid being made dizzy, and then begin
again:--

          "This is the way we comb our hair,
           This is the way we comb our hair,
           This is the way we comb our hair,
                      So early in the morning.

          "This is the way we brush our teeth,
           This is the way we brush our teeth,
           This is the way we brush our teeth,
                      So early in the morning.

          "This is the way we clean our nails,
           This is the way we clean our nails,
           This is the way we clean our nails,
                      So early in the morning."

After this marching and singing, the children return to their seats to
prepare a lesson in geography, which they recite standing near the
globe, the teacher pointing out the places upon it.

Recess and the various sports recommended by the teacher follow, and
then come arithmetic and the numeral frame. This is a wooden frame
about a foot square, with twelve stout wires passing from one side to
the other. Strung on each of these wires are twelve round stones, about
the size of marbles. With this frame Miss Grant taught her little
scholars to add, subtract, and multiply numbers, in the same manner that
Mrs. Gray had taught her little pupils with marbles.

At the close of the morning session, the children marched in the circle
again, singing five times five are twenty-five, and five times six are
thirty, to the tune of Yankee Doodle.

In the afternoon, the exercises were quite as varied. The lessons mostly
being committed in the morning, the children were allowed to tell
stories, which the teacher wrote for them on the blackboard,--or they
recited hymns and verses they had learned; sung, marched, and listened
to the instructions of their teacher.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER III.

THE NEW SCHOLAR.


IN a house near the one where Miss Grant boarded was a little girl whose
name was Hitty Moran. Her real name was Mehitable, but her mother and
all her companions called her Hitty. She belonged to a very poor family,
and as she was the eldest of a number of children, her mother thought
she could not spare her to attend school.

From the windows of her chamber, Miss Grant often saw Hitty sitting on
the doorstep, holding a large baby in her arms. She noticed that Hitty
was always kind to her baby brother; that she sung to him, let him pull
her long hair, and never became impatient or fretful with him. All this
interested the kind teacher in the child, and she longed to be of some
use to her.

One day, when she was returning from her school, she overtook Hitty, who
was carrying a heavy basket of potatoes. "Let me help you," said the
teacher, taking hold of the handle.

As they walked along, Miss Grant asked, "Did you ever go to school?"

"No, ma'am," said Hitty; "though I staid in a house once where the
lady's son taught me my letters."

"Should you like to learn?" asked the teacher.

"O, yes, ma'am; sure I should be proud if I could read; but mother has
so much work, and Bobby takes kindly to me, so that she can't spare me
to go to school."

"I should think it could be planned somehow for you to learn," said
Miss Grant, kindly. "I will go in and see your mother this evening."

She did so, and talked with Mrs. Moran of the advantage it would be to
Hitty, if she could learn to read and write.

"Only think," said the lady, "she could teach her brothers their
letters, and read them pretty stories to keep them quiet while you are
busy at work."

"Feth, ma'am, sure, and I've sinse enough to see the truth of what
you're saying," said the poor mother. "Her father often gets a paper
from the ould country; but it's little use to us, you see, because the
spelling and the pronouncing are quite beyont him. I've often enough
wished we could have the luck to give one of the childer an education."

"Can't you spare her to go to school a part of the time?"

"Sure, ma'am, and that's the trouble intirely. The teachers complain
when the childer don't be regular."

Just at this moment one of the children fell down, and began to cry so
loud, that Miss Grant took her leave. She was in earnest about doing
something for Hitty; and she walked as far as Mrs. Gray's, to ask her
advice about it.

"Why don't you allow her to attend your school?" inquired the lady.
"One hour in the day would be better than nothing."

"I should be glad to do so, if I thought the parents would not object,"
answered the teacher. "I think with a little trouble she could be made
to look tidy."

Miss Grant was not at all rich, but when a lady is resolved to do a
kindness, she always finds out a way. She knew that Hitty had no dress
suitable to wear to school. She opened her purse after she had reached
home, and taking out some money she had laid by to purchase a new book,
she walked to the store, and bought some calico to make a child's dress.

On her way back she called at Mrs. Moran's, and told her Hitty might
come to her school every afternoon if her mother could not spare her in
the morning, and that if her mother would try to send her, she would
provide a new gown.

Mrs. Moran was very grateful for this kindness, and promised to get
along without Hitty whenever she could. In three days, the little girl
called for her teacher, her face and hands so bright, and clean, and
rosy, that you would scarcely know her. The dress fitted charmingly, and
the grateful smile and look of delight with which, she regarded herself
when Miss Grant tied on a neat apron with pockets in it, quite repaid
the lady for all her expense and trouble.

Most of the scholars were kind to Hitty, and willingly lent her a slate,
pencil, or book, when their teacher requested it. But one little girl,
whose name I am sorry to say was Nelly, did not like to play with Hitty,
because she lived in such a poor house.

She was ashamed to refuse when her teacher asked her to show the new
scholar how to make the figures on her slate; but she had a pout on her
lips, which Miss Grant had never seen there before, and her voice did
not sound sweet and kind.

When the lady saw these marks of pride in her beloved pupil, it made her
heart ache. She had been so full of love to the poor, ignorant child,
and so anxious to do her good, that she could not bear the thought of
any one in her school treating Hitty unkindly. For a moment she gazed
sorrowfully in Nelly's flushed face, saw her move away from her new
schoolmate as far on the seat as she could, and then she called, "Hitty,
come and sit by me."

Presently Frankie raised his little fat hand, and when she nodded to him
that he had permission to speak, he asked, "May the new girl see me
make pictures on the blackboard?"

"Yes, darling," answered the lady, rising and patting him on his curly
head. "Perhaps you can teach her to make a picture too."

"See, Hitty," said Frankie; "this is the way to do it;" and the dear boy
stood very erect and proud of the confidence of his teacher.

When Miss Grant glanced toward Nelly, she was sorry to see that the
little girl looked angry, that her cousin was taking so much pains with
the new girl, and that he seemed so happy in doing it.

Shall I tell you what I think the bad spirit was whispering in her ear?
It was this: "Nelly, your father is rich; you live in a fine house and
wear nice clothes; you are right not to like to sit by Hitty, who is
very poor and ignorant."

Ah, my little girl, do you remember who has given you so many blessings?
It is God; but if you are not grateful to him, and kind to those who are
less favored, he may take away your father and mother, and leave you
without home or friends.




CHAPTER IV.

THE INJURED GIRL.


MISS GRANT was very much pleased with Frankie's kindness to Hitty; and
she hoped Nelly would see how lovely it made him appear, and try to
imitate him.

When the school closed, Hitty felt so grateful to Frankie for showing
her the figures, that she stood by him in the closet, to see whether
she could not do something for him. His cap was on a low hook, where he
could reach it; but the scarf he wore with it, was hung up higher. Hitty
saw him trying to jump and catch the end to pull it down, and she said
quickly, "I can reach it. I will get it for you;" and she gave it to him
with a bright smile.

"Thank you," said Frankie, pleasantly.

When they were out by the gate the scarf blew off, and Hitty ran to pick
it up, when Nelly snatched it from her, and said, "Let alone my cousin's
things, you ugly girl;" at the same time she gave Hitty a rough push to
get her out of the way.

I do not think Nelly was so very wicked as to wish really to hurt the
little girl, but she was angry, because her conscience was telling her
she had done wrong.

She heard Hitty scream, but she ran on, pulling Frankie along, though he
urged her to go back, and see what was the matter with the poor girl.

"No, no!" she cried; "I don't like Hitty, and I don't want to walk with
her." Then she began to talk about Ponto, and said she wished he would
come and carry her basket for her.

Almost always, when Nelly went home from school, she and Frankie ran up
stairs to the chamber where Mrs. Gray sat at work; but now she proposed
that they should play in the garden with the dog.

The lady heard their voices, and wondered they did not come in to see
her before they began to play. In about fifteen minutes she heard some
one ring the bell at the back door, and presently Sally came up stairs
into her room, leading a little girl by the hand.

It was Hitty, but with such a great swelling on her forehead that Mrs.
Gray did not at first recognize her. Her eyes were red and swollen with
crying, and even now she could scarcely keep back her sobs.

As she came in, she walked straight across the room to the lady, and put
a note into her hand.

Mrs. Gray opened it, and read with great sorrow the following words:
"Nelly pushed this little girl against the stone post, at the school
house gate. I am exceedingly grieved, and as I cannot see Nelly
to-night, I have sent Hitty to you. Please do what you think best in the
case."

"Come here, poor child," said the lady, tenderly; "that is a dreadful
bunch on your forehead. How did it happen?"

"I was picking up your little boy's scarf when it fell off his neck,
and Nelly snatched it away, and pushed me so hard that I fell against
the post. She called me names, too;" and Hitty began to sob again.

"What did Frankie do?" asked his mamma.

"Nothing at all, ma'am. It's very kind to me, he was."

The lady bade the child sit down. She then went to the closet and poured
some arnica from a bottle into a bowl of water, and after wetting a
cloth in it, bound it upon the forehead of the child. Then she rang the
bell, and sent Margie to find Nelly and bring her into the house.

While she was waiting, she talked with Hitty, and soon became as much
interested in her as the teacher had been.

Presently Nelly came in, followed by her cousin. She started and
blushed when she saw Hitty; but Frankie ran to the little girl, asking,
"What is the matter with your head? Have you hurt yourself?"

"No," replied Hitty; "she did it," pointing to Nelly.

"Look here," said her aunt, raising the cloth and pointing to the
swelling, which was half as large as an egg.

Frankie exclaimed, "O, dear! I'm sorry. Does it ache bad?"

Nelly held down her head and began to cry. She was very much frightened
at what she had done.

"Frankie," said his mother, "you may go down with Hitty to the cook, and
ask her for a piece of cake for the little girl. Then you may walk with
her as far as your teacher's, and wait till I come. Hitty, you may go
home and tell your mother I shall bring Nelly there soon, to have her
say what punishment so naughty a girl deserves."

"O, don't, aunty! don't take me there! I'm afraid to go!" sobbed Nelly,
catching hold of her aunt.

"Sit down," said Mrs. Gray, gravely.

"What are you going to do with me?" asked the child, in an agony of
fear.

"I am going to talk with you, and I wish you to tell me how this
dreadful thing occurred. O Nelly, I can't tell you how very grieved I
am, that you should do so! I thought you had conquered your bad temper,
and had become a lovely, amiable child."

The tears stood in Mrs. Gray's eyes, and her voice trembled as she
spoke. Nelly sobbed as if her heart would break; but as her aunt waited
for her to reply, she said, "I am sorry, aunty. I didn't mean to hurt
her so; but I didn't want her to touch Frankie's things."

"Why not? I am sure it was kind of her to pick up his scarf."

Nelly covered her burning face with her hands.

"Tell me the truth, my child," said her aunt, firmly.

"She is so poor," whispered Nelly. "I don't like poor girls; and then
she lives in such an old house."

"Why, Nelly!" exclaimed the lady, "I can hardly believe you have so
proud and wicked a heart. Suppose your father should lose all his
property, and you should be obliged to go to the poorhouse, and wear an
old, shabby dress; should you think that was a good reason why another
little girl, whom God had blessed with a good home and kind friends,
delighting to supply her with the comforts of life, should treat you
unkindly?"

"No, indeed, aunty! I did not think how very wicked I was." Then Nelly
confessed truthfully all the naughty feelings which had made her so
unkind to the new scholar, though she sobbed so much that she could
hardly speak.

Mrs. Gray talked a long time with her, explaining where her sin lay;
first, in cherishing pride, and then in giving way to anger, which was
the very spirit of Cain when he killed his brother. After this they
knelt down together; and Nelly, in a voice broken with weeping, asked
God to forgive her great sin, and help her to be a good child.




CHAPTER V.

NELLY AT MRS. MORAN'S.


"COME, now, my dear," said the lady, putting on her bonnet; "we must go
to Mrs. Moran's and inquire about Hitty."

"I am afraid to," screamed Nelly, clinging to her aunt. "O, I am sure I
shall never do so again! I don't dare to go there."

"Why, Nelly?" asked her aunt, pitying her distress. "If any little girl
had injured you so, I should think it was a very small thing for her to
do, to come and say she was sorry, and ask your forgiveness. You are
really sorry, I think. It is but right you should tell her so."

As they approached the house the poor child seemed in such an agony of
fear, that her aunt was obliged to soothe her to lead her on. Her
conscience told her she had been unkind, even cruel, to her companion,
who had in no way injured her, and she feared Hitty's father and mother
would be very angry.

Mr. Moran lived in the upper part of a building which had once been used
as a shop. A pair of wide stairs went up outside the house to the door,
which opened into their room. A man was at work chopping wood at the
foot of the stairs, and as soon as Nelly saw him she ran behind her
aunt, whispering, "O, I dare not go! that's Hitty's father."

"I will take care of you," answered the lady, knocking at the door.

Mrs. Moran presently opened it, and they saw Hitty sitting on a low
stool, playing with the baby, who was cooing and crowing with delight at
having her back again.

"I have come," said Mrs. Gray, "with my little niece, who injured your
daughter at school. She wishes to ask you to forgive her."

Nelly was crying bitterly, so that she could scarcely speak; but at last
she sobbed out, "I didn't mean to hurt her so. I'm very sorry."

"Don't cry, pet!" said Mrs. Moran, kindly. "I dare say you meant her no
harm; and if you did, sure and we all are in the wrong sometimes. Hitty
lays up nothing against you. There, honey, stop a bit, and she'll tell
you the same. Come, Hitty, tell the little girl you forgive her, since
the lady is so kind as to ask it."

Hitty came forward with Bobby still in her arms, and when Nelly held out
her hand, shook it cordially, saying, "My head is almost well now, and
by to-morrow I'll never think of the blow again. I'm sorry for you,
Nelly, to see you crying so."

Mrs. Gray sat for a time talking with Mrs. Moran, and encouraging her to
allow Hitty to learn to read. There was one little boy just Frankie's
age, whom the lady advised her to send to the public school.

This, the poor woman said, she should be glad to do, if the lad had
clothes.

The next day, when Hitty returned from school, Nelly, Frankie, and
Ponto accompanied her, each of them carrying a bundle as large as they
could lift, with dresses, jackets, and sacks, the children had outgrown.

Mrs. Moran hardly knew how to express her gratitude, as she held up one
article after another, and saw how nicely they would fit Ned or others
among her children.

This lesson, though severe at the time, was never forgotten by Nelly.
After this no one was more eager than she to show kindness to Hitty, or
more pleased when the poor girl succeeded in learning to read.

In the afternoon most of the scholars repeated a hymn which they had
learned at home, or a few verses from the Bible. Nelly noticed that
Hitty never repeated any, and one day asked her the reason.

"I haven't any books," answered the child, "and then I couldn't make out
the hard words, you know."

Nelly looked thoughtful for a minute, and then jumped up and down in her
glee. "Ask your mother to let you come to aunty's to-night, or else come
early to school and stop there to-morrow," she cried, "and I will teach
you one of my pretty songs."

Two days later, when Miss Grant said, "Now we will hear the hymns or
verses," Hitty, with a timid air and a blushing face, took her stand on
the floor. She cast a glance at Nelly, whose whole countenance was
glowing with pleasure, and then repeated the following pretty hymn:--

          "'Who was that, dear mamma, who ate
             Her breakfast here this morn?
           With tangled hair and ragged shoes,
             And gown and apron torn?'

          'They call her lazy Jane, my dear;
             She begs her bread all day,
           And gets a lodging in the barn,
             At night, among the hay.

          'For when she was a little girl,
             She loved her play too well;
           At school she would not mind her book,
             Nor learn to read and spell.

          '"Dear Jane," her mother oft would say,
             "Pray learn to work and read;
           Then you'll be able, when you're grown,
             To earn your clothes and bread."'

           But lazy Jenny did not care;
             She'd neither knit nor sew;
           To romp with naughty girls and boys
             Was all that she would do.

           So she grew up a very dunce;
             And when her parents died,
           She knew not how to teach a school,
             Nor work, if she had tried.

           And now, an idle vagabond,
             She strolls about the streets;
           And not a friend can Jenny find
             In any one she meets.

           And now, dear child, should you neglect
             Your book or work again,
           Or play, when you should be at school,
             Remember Lazy Jane."




CHAPTER VI.

FRANKIE AND THE CRIPPLE.


ONE evening, near the close of the term, Nelly walked home in company
with one of her schoolmates, and did not notice that her cousin went
another way. One, two hours passed by, and Frankie did not make his
appearance; and at last his mother became so anxious, that she sent his
brother out to search for him.

Willie went to the square to see whether he had stopped at any of the
stores, then, as he did not find him, to the houses of some of his
schoolmates, but none of them had seen him since school.

"Where can he have gone?" said Willie to himself. "Perhaps he was at his
teacher's, and has returned before this time."

He walked back toward home, looking around on every side.

He was passing a house, when he heard a noise in the yard, and looking
through the trees, saw a company of boys standing round a curious little
carriage, in which sat a boy who was talking to them. He ran eagerly
into the yard, for he thought Frankie was among them.

As he drew nearer, he found it was not a boy in the carriage, but a man
without legs. He had met with a dreadful accident, and been obliged to
have both his legs cut off; and now he was trying to support himself by
selling pictures, rolling himself in his carriage from house to house by
means of a crank wheel. This was very hard work for him, especially when
he was going uphill; sometimes he was obliged to get boys to push
behind.

Willie saw his brother Frankie standing by the man, helping him hold his
pictures, which he was exhibiting to the lady at the window. Frankie's
face was very red, and great drops of perspiration stood on his forehead
and nose.

"Why haven't you been home?" asked Willie. "Mother is very anxious about
you."

"O, Willie, see this poor man!" exclaimed Frankie. "I have been pushing
his wagon for him ever since school. He says he is a cripple, and can't
walk at all. I'm going to push his carriage home now, as soon as he has
sold pictures here, and then ask mamma to give him some supper."

"Why, Frankie Gray," called out the lady at the window, "is that you?
Well, come and take this money, dear, to pay for three pictures."

When the carriage started, the boys all ran along; but none of them
offered to assist in rolling it, except Willie and Frankie.

"You are tired," said Willie; "I'll push now." So Frankie took off his
straw hat, and wiped the perspiration from his forehead. His hair was
wet through, and curled in small rings all over his head.

Mrs. Gray was looking anxiously from the window when they entered the
avenue, and ran eagerly down to meet them.

"O, mamma!" cried Frankie; "I met a poor man. He has no legs, and can't
walk at all. He has to wheel himself about in a little carriage, to get
enough money to buy his food. It's very hard work, and so I waited to
push it for him a little while. Was it naughty, mamma? Will you please
to give him some supper?"

Mrs. Gray looked in her son's earnest, loving eyes, and all her
displeasure against him vanished. She caught him to her heart, and
kissed his cheek and lips. "Yes, my dear," she said, "you shall have the
pleasure of giving him a good supper. But are you not hungry yourself?
It is long past tea time."

"I did not think any thing about it, mamma," said Frankie, "I was so
sorry for the poor man. There, Willie has pushed his carriage up to the
back door. I wonder how he can get out."

In a few minutes the poor cripple had walked on his knees to the table,
where Jane had set him a bountiful meal. Frankie seemed to consider the
man his especial charge, and Mrs. Gray drew Willie into the entry,
where, through the door, they could see what passed.

As soon as the food was before him, the cripple began to eat; and
Frankie, who was seated opposite, so as to be ready to attend to his
wants, gazed at him in great surprise. "Why!" said he, "you didn't pray
to God."

I suppose the dear child had never before seen any one begin to eat
without first asking a blessing. Even when he and Nelly were playing
tea, one of them always shut their eyes, and solemnly asked God to bless
the food.

The man stared at him and went on eating, while Mrs. Gray smiled as she
peeped through the door, to see how serious the boy looked.

"Don't you love God?" asked Frankie.

"I dun know," said the man.

"I love him," continued the child, "and I should think you would;" then,
after waiting a moment, he asked, "Did he cut your legs off?"

"No," said the man, laughing; "the doctor did it."

"I'm glad of that," said Frankie. "You ought to love God, and pray to
him every day. Perhaps, if you did, he would let your legs grow again."

Willie almost laughed aloud; but Frankie was so eager to do the man
good, that he did not hear him.

"I am afraid you are a wicked man," he said, "if you don't pray any."

Mrs. Gray saw the cripple lay down his knife and fork, and gaze at the
child; presently he spoke, but his voice trembled as he said, "I used to
pray when I was a little shaver like you. My mother taught me."

"Where is she now?" asked the boy.

"She has gone up there, long ago," said the man, softly pointing his
finger upward.

"Well," said Frankie, earnestly, "you can't go to heaven and live with
her there, unless you are a good man and love God. I used to be naughty
once, but my mother whipped me to make me good."

"That's too bad," said the cripple.

"No; it's just right. The Bible says she must. I'm trying now to be a
good boy; and I wish you would try too."

"I guess there isn't much danger of you," said the man. "You're the
most wonderful chap I ever saw."

"I don't know what _chap_ is," replied Frankie. "When I say my prayers
to-night, I am going to ask God to give you a new heart; and then you
can't help being good."

"I wish you would," whispered the man, drawing his shirt sleeve across
his eyes.

He pushed his chair back from the table, saying, "I've had a first-rate
supper; and I thank you and your mother a thousand times for all your
kindness."

Willie then stepped into the kitchen, and helped him from his chair into
his carriage, at the back door. The man gave Frankie two of his
handsomest pictures, saying, "Don't forget what you promised to do for
me to-night. I have nobody else to pray for me now."




CHAPTER VII.

THE RAINY DAY.


MISS GRANT gave her scholars Wednesday and Saturday afternoons for play.

One Wednesday morning it rained very hard; and as Nelly was not quite
well, her aunt thought it not best for her to go to school. Margie too
had been unwell for a few days; so Mrs. Gray sent for her to come up to
the nursery, that they might amuse themselves with their dolls.

Margie was eleven years of age; but she liked to play as well as ever.
She had Frankie's black Dinah for her child; and then she had a large
rag baby of her own, while Nelly had great Fanny and two smaller dolls.

These they set up in a row, and played school; but just as they were
ready to begin, Ponto walked into the room, and tipped the scholars
over.

"O Ponto, how naughty!" exclaimed Nelly, laughing aloud, as he carefully
stepped over the pupils, who were lying on their faces. "Now let us
begin again."

So Dinah, and Fanny, and Lily Gray, and Jenny, Margie's doll, were all
placed in nice order again, their backs up against the wall; and after a
few words, charging the scholars to be very good and say their lessons
well, Nelly rang her aunt's small table bell, for them to take their
places in the class.

But not one of the dollies stirred; and so Nelly took Dinah's hand, and
led her out to the floor.

They played in this way for more than an hour, and then Nelly complained
of the headache; and so her aunt sent her to lie down and rest till
dinner.

In the mean time, Frankie had put on his India rubber boots, and holding
a large umbrella, started off for school, as happy as possible. He had
never been absent or tardy a single day; and his teacher had promised to
paint him a beautiful card, if he continued his good conduct to the end
of the term.

The dear boy was very much pleased at this, and was trying in every way
to be good. He trudged gayly on right through the puddles of water, the
rain pattering upon his umbrella, and dripping off upon the ground.

"I don't care," said Frankie to himself. "It's hard walking, I know; but
I shall have a good time when I get there. My teacher will say, 'I knew
you would be here, Frankie, because you belong to the Try Company.'"

When he reached the schoolroom, he found no one there but his teacher
and Hitty; and how do you think they came so safely in all the rain?
Frankie laughed most heartily when they told him. They rode with the
butcher in his covered cart.

They had kindled a nice fire in the open grate, and after the little
fellow had stamped off the mud in the porch, he came in and stood by it
to dry himself.

The clock struck nine; but not one more of the scholars came, because it
was only a half day, the teacher said; and so Frankie and Hitty stood
before her, instead of going on the gallery, and repeated the Lord's
Prayer.

Then she told them to bring their chairs close to the fire.

"What a funny little school!" said Frankie, laughing.

The teacher laughed too, and said, "I think we shall have a very
pleasant time." She rang the bell, and Frankie marched out alone to his
class. Then she rung it again, and Hitty read and spelt. She could read
quite well now, and was getting to be a very good scholar.

After this, Miss Grant said, "I must march with you, I suppose;" and so
she stepped upon the circle; and they marched around and around,
singing,--

          "This is the way we wash our face,"

the teacher washing hers as hard as any of them.

At recess she took a piece of paper from her desk, and drew a pretty
picture of a dog carrying a basket in his mouth, and told Frankie to
draw one like it.

Frankie was delighted, and said, "This dog is like Ponto, only that it
has a short tail instead of a long one."

Miss Grant then cut a paper doll for Hitty, and afterward one for
Nelly. She made paper dresses, and aprons, and capes, and paper hats for
their heads; and was so much engaged when she saw how delighted the
children were, that she forgot she was teaching school, and never rang
the bell for the close of recess for more than an hour.

They all laughed merrily, and Frankie, clapping his hands, said, "I like
rainy days best of all!"

After recess, Miss Grant gave the children a lesson in geography, and
then related a story of a boy, named Charles Huntington, who, by his
honesty, uprightness, and faithfulness to his employer, became a great
and good man. Having gained wealth, he gave freely of it to the poor and
needy, and, after a long life of happiness and usefulness, died lamented
by all who knew him.

Frankie listened attentively to the story, and then said, "I'm going to
ask God to help me be like Mr. Charles Huntington."

And here we must leave our young friend, with the hope that the promise
of early youth was verified in his manhood; that the seed sown in his
young and tender heart, and watered by his mother's tearful prayers,
sprang up and bore abundant fruit.

As for his cousin Nelly, she continued with her aunt for many years,
until her mother died, when she returned home to comfort and bless her
father, and help train her little brother as she had herself been taught
by her kind friends. She always entertained for Frankie the deep
affection of a sister; and when he graduated from college with the first
honors of his class, no one rejoiced or felt more proud of his success
than his cousin Nelly.

       *       *       *       *       *


Transcriber's Note:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired. The quotation marks around the poem
on pages 79-81 was not repaired as the author's intent could not be
ascertained. The marks were left as printed.





End of Project Gutenberg's Little Frankie at School, by Madeline Leslie

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE FRANKIE AT SCHOOL ***

***** This file should be named 33523.txt or 33523.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/5/2/33523/

Produced by Emmy and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
