The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Carved Cupboard, by Amy Le Feuvre

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Carved Cupboard

Author: Amy Le Feuvre

Release Date: August 4, 2007 [EBook #22232]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CARVED CUPBOARD ***




Produced by Al Haines










[Frontispiece: 'I HAVE SEALED THE DIRECTIONS IN THIS ENVELOPE.']






THE CARVED CUPBOARD


BY

AMY LE FEUVRE


AUTHOR OF

  'PROBABLE SONS,' 'TEDDY'S BUTTON,' 'LEGEND LED,'
  'ODD MADE EVEN,' 'HEATHER'S MISTRESS,' ETC.




R.T.S., 4 Bouverie Street, London, E.C. 4

1899




Contents


CHAPTER I
  A SUPPLANTER

CHAPTER II
  FOUR VERSES

CHAPTER III
  A COUNTRY HOME

CHAPTER IV
  BLUEBEARD'S CUPBOARD

CHAPTER V
  A QUIET SUNDAY

CHAPTER VI
  A DEPARTURE

CHAPTER VII
  UNREST

CHAPTER VIII
  ENTERTAINING A STRANGER

CHAPTER IX
  GWEN'S RESOLVE

CHAPTER X
  CLARE'S DISCOVERY

CHAPTER XI
  AGATHA'S LEGACY

CHAPTER XII
  OUT IN CALIFORNIA

CHAPTER XIII
  HIS LAST MESSAGE

CHAPTER XIV
  THE COUSINS' RETURN

CHAPTER XV
  ALICK LESTER

CHAPTER XVI
  BRINGING BAD TIDINGS

CHAPTER XVII
  ELFIE'S CHOICE

CHAPTER XVIII
  PATTY'S GRAVE

CHAPTER XIX
  THE RIGHTFUL HEIR

CHAPTER XX
  BROUGHT BACK




ILLUSTRATIONS


'I HAVE SEALED THE DIRECTIONS IN THIS ENVELOPE.' . . . . . .
_Frontispiece_

AND SAW A MAN ON HIS KNEES BY THE CUPBOARD




THE CARVED CUPBOARD


CHAPTER I

A Supplanter

  'For troubles wrought of men,
  Patience is hard.'--_J. Ingelow._


The firelight shone upon a comfortably-furnished drawing-room in one of
the quiet London squares, and upon four girlish figures grouped around
a small tea-table.  Agatha Dane, the eldest, sat back in her chair with
a little wrinkle of perplexity upon her usually placid brow.  Rather
plump and short of stature, with no pretensions to beauty, there was
yet something very attractive in her bright open countenance; and she
was one to whom many turned instinctively for comfort and help.

Gwendoline, who sat next her, and was doing most of the talking, was a
tall, slight, handsome girl, with dark eyes that flashed and sparkled
with animation as she spoke, and there was a certain stateliness of
carriage that made some of her acquaintances term her proud.

Clare was toying absently with her spoon and tea-cup; she was
listening, and occasionally put in a word, but her thoughts were
evidently elsewhere.  She had not the determination in her face that
was Gwendoline's characteristic; and perhaps the varying expressions
passing over it, and so transparent to those who knew her, formed her
chief charm.  There was a wistfulness in her dark blue eyes, and a look
of expectation that one longed to see fulfilled; and her dreamy
preoccupied manner often made her friends wonder if she spent all her
time in dreamland.

Elfrida sat on the hearth-rug with her sunny hair glistening in the
firelight.  She was the youngest and prettiest of the four, and had
only just returned from Germany that same day.  It was her eager
questioning that was making them all linger over their tea.

'But I don't understand,' she said, a little impatiently.  'How does
Cousin James happen to be here at all?  Aunt Mildred never cared for
him.  She said last year when I was home that he was a regular screw,
and that he only came on a visit to save his housekeeping bills.  Now I
come back and find dear Aunt Mildred gone, and he in full possession of
our home, ready to turn us out to-morrow, you say!  Aunt Mildred always
told us we should never want after her death.'

'We shall not actually do that,' said Agatha quietly, 'for she has left
us a legacy each, which will at any rate keep the wolf from the door.'

'But hasn't she left us Dane Hall?  She always said she would.'

'No; a codicil to that will has been added since James has been here.'

'Yes; he has managed it beautifully,' put in Gwendoline, with scorn in
her tone.  'He came down here directly he heard she was ill, and
established himself in the dressing-room next to hers.  Clare has been
away, but Agatha and I were virtually shut out of the sick-room from
the time he entered the house.  He got a trained nurse; said Agatha was
worn out, and must rest; and told Nannie she was too old and too
near-sighted to be left alone with her mistress.  The poor old soul has
been weeping her eyes out since!  Then he took advantage of Aunt
Mildred's state of weakness, and worried and coaxed her into making
this unjust codicil.  All in his favour, of course; I don't believe
poor aunt knew what she was doing.  And we shall have to shift for
ourselves now.  I hope he will enjoy his unrighteous possessions.  I--I
hate him!'

'What are we going to do?'

'Well,' said Agatha, rousing herself, 'we have been talking over
matters together.  You see, we can be independent of each other if we
choose, for we are all of age, and have each about 100 pounds a year,
besides what the sale of this house will bring us.'

'Oh, she left us this house, did she?  Then why can't we go on living
here?'

'The lease terminates at the end of this year, and we have not the
income to keep it up.  Why, Elfie, a town house like this is ruinous
for people of small means!  I feel anxious for us to have a home
together somewhere, even if we have to go into the country for it; but,
of course, I would not influence any of you to side with me against
your inclinations.'

'It would be an establishment of old maids; single women, shall we say?
It doesn't sound very nice, buried away in the country.'

Elfie spoke dubiously; then Gwen broke in, 'Well, if Clare is wise, she
will marry soon.  I'm sure two years' engagement ought to be long
enough in all conscience to satisfy her!'

Clare's soft cheeks flushed a little.

'Hugh is going out to Africa, you know, with a survey party.  We could
not settle till after that.  He is quite of the same mind as I am on
that point!'

'Do you like the country plan, Gwen?' asked Elfie.

'Yes, I think I do.  I am personally sick of town.  A suburban life
would be intolerable, and we have all resources enough to prevent us
from stagnating.'

Elfie gave a little sigh.

'You don't know how I was looking forward to a London season.  I have
been in Germany ever since I left school, studying music.  And now what
is the good of it?  I shall be out of touch with it entirely.'

'Would you like to stay in town for a little?' asked Agatha
sympathetically.  'We could easily arrange for you to board with some
nice people somewhere.'

'No, I will come with you, and see how it works.  I suppose we shall
not be banished from London for ever?  We can sometimes come up for a
short stay?'

'Oh yes, I think so.  We have not settled where to live yet, but we
have been looking through some house agents' lists, and Gwen is full of
plans, as usual.'

'You would be badly off without me to keep you all alive,' said Gwen
laughing.  'If I were by myself, I would like nothing better than a
caravan or a house-boat; but that wouldn't suit all of us.'

'Not me,' said Clare, with a little grimace of disgust.

'Oh, it is a shame!' exclaimed Elfie, springing up, and walking up and
down in her excitement; 'how dare Cousin James behave so treacherously!
Can't we dispute the will?  Can't we go to law?'

'It is useless to think of such a thing.  We can prove nothing.  He is
a man, and has had a jealous feeling of us all our lives.  Now fortune
has favoured him, and he is glorying in his prosperity.  He is rightly
named James, or Jacob, for he is a base supplanter!'

'Will you give me a cup of tea?'

Gwen started at the voice following her hot outburst so quickly, and
Elfie stopped her hurried walk, and turned a little defiantly towards
the new-comer.

Mr. James Dane was a quiet-looking, sprucely-dressed man of over forty
years of age.  He seated himself with the greatest equanimity in the
midst of the group, and Agatha in silence poured him out a cup of tea,
and handed it to him.

'I am afraid I have interrupted a very animated discussion,' he said
blandly.  'I suppose you are arranging future plans.  Of course, you
cannot well remain here.  Would you like me to take any steps about the
sale for you?  I shall be a week longer in town.'

'Mr. Watkins will arrange all that for us, thank you,' replied Agatha
quietly.

'Oh, very well.  Why, Elfrida, I never noticed you!  Just come back
from Germany, have you?  It seems to have suited your health.  You are
looking quite bonny.'

'I don't feel so,' was the blunt reply; 'it is not a very happy
home-coming!'

'No, of course not.  But, as my wife was saying this morning, you girls
can only have pleasant memories of your dear aunt, who did so much for
you all when she was alive.  I remember when first you all arrived from
India, and she was in such an anxious state of bewilderment at the
thought of the charge of four orphan children, my mother said to her,
"Oh, well, Mildred, if you are good enough to educate them, they will
naturally do something later to relieve you of the burden of
maintaining them."  And my wife and I have been so surprised at your
all continuing to look upon her house as your rightful home.  I suppose
in the goodness of her heart she insisted upon it.  Still, nowadays,
young ladies are so independent, and have such a wide scope for their
talents, that we quite expected to hear you were supporting yourselves,
after the liberal education that you have received.'

There was dead silence after this speech, which Gwen broke at last, and
her tone was haughtiness itself.

'As you have met with such success in your visit here, Cousin James,
you could at least afford to be generous towards us.  You have one
mercy to be thankful for, and that is, that we never have, and never
shall, look to you to maintain us!'

And then she left the room, shutting the door behind her with a rather
ungentle hand.  Mr. Dane smiled, passed his cup to be refilled, and
then turned to Clare.

'I suppose your marriage will be hastened now, will it not?  When is
the happy day to be?'

'I will let you know when it is settled,' was the quiet reply.

'Come upstairs with me, Clare, and see Nannie,' said Elfie impetuously;
'I haven't been near her yet, dear old thing!'

The two girls quitted the room together, and with a little sigh Agatha
settled herself down to a _tete-a-tete_ with her cousin.

'You girls have all assumed such aggressive demeanours towards me, that
I really hardly know if you will take any advice from me.  It is
exceedingly foolish to adopt such airs.  No doubt you are disappointed
in not being the sole heiresses of our aunt, but you ought not to have
expected it for a moment.  She had for a long time regretted making
that rash will, which was drawn up when her heart was full of pity for
your penniless condition.  Only, being in such robust health, she
always put off doing it until this last sad illness of hers.  Where do
you think of settling?'

'We have not made up our minds.'

'Have you heard from your brother lately?  Is he doing better than he
was?  It is such a mistake for a young fellow to think he will make his
fortune in the Colonies nowadays.  I only hope you may not find him
thrown on your hands soon.'

'Walter is doing very well, thank you.  There is no chance of his
coming back to England for a good long time.'

'I have been wondering whether you would like to settle somewhere near
London.  I have some house property at Hampstead, and could let you
have a small villa there at a very reasonable rent.  Of course,
understand, this is entirely because I should like to give you any help
that I can.'

At this Agatha could not help smiling.

'It is very kind of you, but we have decided to live in the country.'

'I am surprised.  Have you ever tried a country life in the winter?  I
am afraid you will find it a great failure.  And, remember, unprotected
females, choosing an isolated position, run the risk of being robbed.
If you do go to the country, be sure and get a house near others.
Well, I must be going.  Say good-bye to the others for me.  I shall
look in again on you before long, and if you want me, you know my club.
Your cousin Helen has left town, and I shall be taking a trip to the
Continent with her very soon.'

He rose, shook hands politely, and directly the door closed upon him,
Agatha hastened to find her sisters.

She knew where to look for them.  In a small room at the end of the
passage past the best bedrooms, Nannie would now be taking her
afternoon cup of tea.  She had been with them all since they were quite
tiny children; had brought them over from India after their parents'
death, and had been kept in Miss Dane's service ever since--first as
their nurse, then as housekeeper, when they no longer needed her care.

She was an old woman now, crippled with rheumatism; but she was a
bright and happy Christian, and had a good influence upon all who came
in contact with her.  It had been already arranged that she was to go
into an alms-house when the house was sold, and Miss Dane had left her
a small legacy, so that her future was provided for.  Agatha's face as
she opened the door was a troubled one.  She saw the old woman in her
easy chair by the fire; Gwen and the two younger ones making themselves
comfortable round her; and all were talking freely to her of what had
passed downstairs.

'Come along, Agatha; has he gone?'

'Yes,' was the reply; 'and I have come to Nannie to be soothed.  All
the way upstairs I have been saying to myself, "Fret not thyself,
because of him who prospereth in his way."  But it is hard to see his
self-complacency.'

'Poor old thing!  When Agatha is disturbed, it must be something
indeed!  Here is a seat.  Nannie has been scolding us, and now she
shall scold you.'




CHAPTER II

Four Verses

'In preparing a guide to immortality, Infinite Wisdom gave not a
dictionary, nor a grammar, but a Bible--a book of heavenly doctrine,
but withal of earthly adaptation.'--_J. Hamilton._


The old woman looked through her glasses at her four nurslings with a
loving eye; then she said very quietly, 'I have been hearing all about
your plans, Miss Agatha, and I'm thinking you have shown your wisdom in
keeping a home together.  Forgive my plain speaking.  I know 'tis an
age for young ladies to make homes for themselves, anywhere and
everywhere, but unless a woman is married, 'tis a risky undertakin'!
I've been inclined to fret that my working days are over, for dearly
would I like to have gone with you, and done what I could to make you
comfortable; but 'tis the Lord's will, and my age and helplessness
doesn't prevent me from prayin' for you all!  You have the same psalm
in your mind, Miss Agatha, that I have been readin' and studyin' this
afternoon.  I would dearly like to give you each a verse out of it, if
you won't take offence.'

'We're in for one of Nannie's preaches!' said Gwen, laughing, as she
placed a large-print Bible before her old nurse; 'but we shan't have a
chance of many more, so we promise to be attentive!'

'Ay, dear Miss Gwen, it isn't a preach!  How often you come up here to
have a cup o' tea to refresh your bodies! and 'tis a bit of refreshment
to your souls that I'm now makin' so bold as to offer.'  Nannie turned
over the pages of her beloved Bible with a reverent hand, then she
looked across at Agatha.

'My dear Miss Agatha, there are four verses here, with a command and a
promise.  I should like to give you each one to think of, through all
the troubles and trials that may come to you.  Will you mark it in your
own Bibles, and live it out, remembering it was Nannie's verse for you,
so that when I'm dead and gone you may still have the comfort and
teachin' of it?'

Agatha was touched by the old woman's solemn earnestness.

'Yes, Nannie, give it to me, and I will try and put it "into practice."'

Nannie's voice rang out in the dusky firelit room, as she repeated,
more from memory than by sight,--

'Trust in the Lord, and do good; so shalt thou dwell in the land, and
verily thou shalt be fed!'

'Thank you, Nannie,' said Agatha after a pause, 'I will look it up and
remember it.'

'Now mine, please,' said Gwen, looking over the old woman's shoulder.
'Is it the next verse for me?'

'No, my dear, I think not.  It seems to me that this must be the Lord's
word to you: "Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in Him, and He
shall bring it to pass."'

'You have given me that because you think I like choosing my own way
through life, now haven't you?'

'Maybe I have.  Choosing our own ways and goin' in them always bring
trouble in the end.  Now, Miss Clare, your verse is the beginning of
the one Miss Agatha was sayin': "Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently
for Him"; and, Miss Elfie, this is for you, "Delight thyself also in
the Lord, and He shall give thee the desires of thine heart."'

'And I am the only one that has got a command without a promise,' said
Clare reproachfully.

Nannie looked at Clare, then at her big Bible again.

'You have a promise further on, Miss Clare, "Those that wait upon the
Lord, they shalt inherit the earth."'

'Ah, Nannie, that is too big a promise to realize.  If it was to
inherit Dane Hall now!'

'My dear, since you were a little wee child, you have always been
looking for something big.  You will inherit more from God Almighty, if
you wait for Him, than ever you could inherit without Him!'

There was silence for a few minutes; then Gwen said, trying to speak
lightly, 'We shan't forget your verses, Nannie; and though I'm afraid
none of us will ever grow into such a saint as yourself, it won't be
for want of an example before us.  Now may we turn to business?  Jacob
has gone, and we must bestir ourselves.  I have cut out an
advertisement from the _Morning Post_, which I think sounds tempting.
And as Agatha seems so slow in making up her mind, I think I shall take
the train to-morrow morning and go and inspect the place myself.
Doesn't it sound as if it ought to suit us?  "To Let.  An old-fashioned
cottage residence, four bedrooms, two attics, three reception-rooms,
well-stocked fruit and vegetable garden.  Owner called abroad suddenly;
will let on reasonable terms!"'

'Where is it?' asked Elfie.

'Hampshire.  I wrote to the agent who advertises, and he said the rent
would be about 40 pounds.  It is close to some pine woods, and only
three miles from a town.  It sounds nice, I think; at any rate, it is
worth seeing about.'

'Do you like old-fashioned cottage residences?' said Clare very
dubiously; 'they always remind me of rotten floors, rats and mice, and
damp musty rooms.'

I hate modern villas,' retorted Gwen, 'with gimcrack walls and smoky
chimneys and bad drainage!  This has an old-world sound.  Let us, if we
live out of town, choose an Arcadia, with nothing to remind us of the
overcrowded suburbs.  Are you willing I should go, Agatha, and come
back and report the land?'

Yes,' said Agatha; 'better you should do it than I, for what suits you
will suit me, but what would suit me might not suit you.  We will talk
it over when you come back.'

And so it was settled; and after an early breakfast next day, Gwen
started on her quest.

She did not come back till between seven and eight o'clock in the
evening, and seemed so tired that Agatha insisted upon her eating a
good dinner before she gave an account of herself.  Then, rested and
refreshed, she came into the drawing-room and settled herself in a
comfortable chair by the fire to give her experiences.

'I really think it will do,' she began.  'I arrived at the station
about twelve o'clock, and walked out the three miles, to see what the
country was like.  Brambleton is a clean, empty little town, with no
one in the streets but a few tottering old men and children, a few good
shops, and there is a market every Friday.  I walked along the high
road for a couple of miles, then turned up a lane with a ragged piece
of common at the end of it, passed one or two nice houses standing back
in their own grounds, a little country church with parsonage adjoining
in the orthodox fashion, a cluster of thatched cottages, and finally
came to the "cottage residence."'

'Is it in a village street?' asked Agatha.

'No, not exactly.  It is in a side road leading to a farm.  It is a low
white house with a great box hedge hiding it from the road, and a
stone-flagged path leading up to the door.  A blue trellis verandah
runs right round it, which I rather liked, and a row of straw bee-hives
in front delighted me.  There was an old woman in charge, who showed me
all over, and talked unceasingly.'

'Now describe the rooms exactly,' said Elfie eagerly; 'and did the
house smell musty and damp?'

'No, I shouldn't say it was at all damp; of course rooms that have been
shut up always seem fusty and close.  It is a little place; you must
not think the rooms are anything like this.  On one side of the door is
a long low room, the width of the house, with a window at each end; the
other side of the passage there are two smaller rooms; the kitchens,
etcetera, lie out at the back; and the stairs go up in the middle of
the passage.  Four fair-sized bedrooms are above, and the two attics
are quite habitable.  The back of the house has the best view; it
overlooks a hill with a cluster of pines, and woods in the distance.
Fields are round it, but the back garden has a good high brick wall,
with plenty of fruit trees, and all laid out as a kitchen garden.  The
front piece is in grass, with a dear old elm in the corner.'

I don't like the sound of the box hedge,' said Agatha thoughtfully; 'it
seems so shut in, and very lonely, I should say.'

'Of course we shall not have many passers-by, except the carters to and
from the farm; but if you are in the country, what can you expect?  We
can cut down the hedge.  I like the place myself, and it is in good
repair, for the owner has only just left it.  I must tell you about
him, for there is quite a story about him.  Old Mrs. Tucker was his
cook.  He is an eccentric widower, and has a brother with a lot of
property in the neighbourhood.  He spends his time in carving,
painting, and writing about old manuscripts.  That is one thing you
will like, Clare; all the doors and cupboards in the house are carved
most beautifully, even the low window sills, and mantelpieces.  About
four months ago he had a dreadful quarrel with his brother, and told
Mrs. Tucker that he was going abroad till his temper cooled.  He stored
all his furniture, and said he would let the house, but only to a
yearly tenant, as he might wish to return again.  That is the
disadvantage of the house; but I think he will not be in a hurry to
return.  There is an old carved cupboard let into the wall in the room
which was his study, and this he has left locked, and wishes any tenant
to understand that it is not to be opened.  They take the house under
this condition.'

'A Bluebeard's cupboard,' said Clare delightedly.  'Why, this is most
interesting.  I am longing to take the house now.'

'That is indeed a woman's speech,' said a voice behind her, and a tall
broad-shouldered man laid his hand gently on her shoulder.

Clare turned round, with a pretty pink colour in her cheeks.

'Oh, Hugh, is it you?  Come and sit down, and hear about the cottage we
meditate taking.  Gwen is our business man, and seems to have found
just the place we wanted.'

Captain Knox took a seat by his betrothed, and was soon hearing about
it all.  Then after it was discussed afresh, and he agreed that it
might prove suitable, the other girls slipped away to the inner
drawing-room, and left the young couple alone.

Clare's wistful dreaminess had vanished now, and she was bright and
animated.

'I believe you girls are rejoicing in your sudden downfall,' said
Captain Knox at length; 'I hear no moans now over your lost fortunes.
It is the outside world that is pitying you.  "Those poor girls," I
hear on all sides, "after the very marked way in which old Miss Dane
told everybody they would be heiresses at her death.  It is most
incomprehensible."'

It is no laughing matter, Hugh,' said Clare gravely.  'We are going to
try and make the best of it; but when we think of James, our blood
boils!'

'Well, darling, you will never know actual want, that is my comfort.
How I wish I could offer you a home now!  but I have been advised so
strongly to go with this party that I feel I ought not to refuse.  It
will only be a matter of six months, I hope, and then I shall take you
away from your country retreat altogether.'

'I sometimes wish----' Clare stopped.

'Well, what?'

'I was going to say I wish you were not in the army, but that is wrong.
I do so much prefer a settled home to the incessant change in the
service.'

Captain Knox's brows clouded a little, for he was a keen soldier, and
was devoted to his corps, which was the Royal Engineers.

'But, Clare, I have heard you say before that you do not care for a gay
town life, nor a quiet country one; so what do you like?'

'I don't know what I like,' she said, laughing; 'generally it is what I
haven't got.  Don't mind my grumblings.  I shall be so tired of the
country, and the dull monotony of it all, by the time you come back,
that I shall fly to you with open arms, and entreat you to take me into
the very midst of garrison gaiety.'

Captain Knox smiled, though he still looked perplexed.  Clare's moods,
and contradictions of humour, were inexplicable to a man of his frank,
straightforward nature.  Yet she was so sweetly penitent after a fit of
discontent, and so delightful in her waywardness, that he only loved
her the more, and found, as so many others do, that woman is a problem
that few masculine brains can solve.

Whilst the two lovers were enjoying their _tete-a-tete_, Elfie had
crept upstairs to see Nannie, and a gravity had settled on her usually
sunny face as she entered her nurse's room.

'Have you come for a chat, Miss Elfie?' inquired the old woman,
brightening at the sight of her.

'Yes, Nannie.  I have been thinking over my verse that you gave me.  I
can't get it out of my head.  It is a very lovely one, but very
difficult to put into practice, I should think.'

'Why, surely, no, my dear!  And for you 'tis easier than most.'

'That is because I always say I find it is easy to be happy.  But,
Nannie, delighting oneself in the Lord is a very different thing.'

'Ay, but the lark that rises with his song, and the flowers that turn
their faces to the sun, or soft refreshing showers, don't find it
difficult to delight themselves in the air and sunshine.  I think, Miss
Elfie, you are one of the Lord's dear children, are you not?'

Elfie's face flushed; then sitting down in a low chair, she rested her
head against Nannie's knees.

'Yes,' she said softly.  'I told you how different everything had been
with me when last I was home, Nannie.  That German governess was such a
help to me.  But what I feel is this: I enjoy everything in life so; it
all seems so bright and sunny to me, that I feel the pleasure I take in
everything may be such a snare.  I ought to have my enjoyment in the
Lord apart from it all.  And I sometimes ask myself if I could be happy
shut up in a prison cell, away from all I love, and--and I almost think
I couldn't.  Nannie smiled.

'You are a foolish child.  Do you think the Lord loves to put His
children in miserable circumstances and keep them there?  Your youth
and your gladness and your hopes are all gifts from Him.  He loves to
see us happy.  Doesn't the sun, and the brightness, and all the lovely
bits o' nature, come straight from Him?  He didn't make London with its
smoke and fog and misery, 'tis us that have done that.'

'But I like London,' put in Elfie.  'I love the shops and the people
and the bustle, and at first I didn't like the idea of the country at
all, but now I am beginning to.'

'Wherever you may be, Miss Elfie, delight yourself in your
surroundings, unless they be sinful; but be sure o' this, you can
delight yourself in the Lord in the midst of it all, and have no need
to separate Him from all your innocent joys.  Doesn't your verse say as
much?  Will the Lord take all that is pleasant away from you, if you do
His command?  No; "He will give thee the desires of thine heart." Could
you want more proof of His love?  You may later on in life have another
lesson to learn, but 'twill come easier then, and you'll be able to say
with Habakkuk, "Although everything else fails, yet I will rejoice in
the Lord."'

Elfie was silent.  Then she got up and kissed her old nurse.

'You're an old saint; you always do me such a world of good.  I think
you have given me the best verse of them all, and I will try and make
it my motto.  Now I must go.  I only ran up to have a peep at you.'




CHAPTER III

A Country Home

  'If thou would'st read a lesson that will keep
  Thy heart from fainting, and thy soul from sleep,
  Go to the woods and hills.  No tears
  Dim the sweet look that Nature wears.'--_Longfellow._


The day had come when the four sisters took their leave of London.  The
sale had taken place, as they only took enough furniture for their
small house, and Nannie had taken a tender and sad farewell of her
charges.

'I feel,' said Gwen, after they had watched her driven away in a cab
with all her little belongings, 'that Nannie does not expect to see any
of us again.  She has given us her dying blessing, like Jacob did to
his sons.  I wonder if her verses will prove prophetic.'

Captain Knox went with them to the station, to see the last of Clare.
He cheered her up by saying he would run down and see them before he
went abroad, and the sisters were all doing their best to be cheerful.
They had sent down two young maids the day before to get things
comfortable, and both Agatha and Gwen had been backwards and forwards
arranging their furniture, so that they did not feel they were going
into a comfortless house.

'I always like everything new,' asserted Elfie.  'I feel quite excited
to see what it will be like.'

'I think it is a dear little place,' Agatha said.  'I am sure we shall
be happy there.'

But their arrival at Brambleton station was in the midst of steady,
driving rain, and a wind that threatened instant destruction to open
umbrellas.  A fly was found, and they were soon driving along the
country road, all distant scenery being obliterated by mist and wet.
Clare's spirits sank at once.

'What a dreadful day, and what miserable country!'

'I hope the house won't be damp,' Agatha said anxiously.

Then Gwen laughed.

'Oh, for pity's sake, don't all begin to croak!  We do have wet days in
London.  If Jane and Martha have done their work properly, we shall
soon forget the wet when we are inside.'

Slowly the fly lumbered along, and darkness had set in when they at
last reached their new home.

Mrs. Tucker, who was keeping the maids company, came bustling to the
door, and when they saw the cheerful little dining-room with its
blazing fire and well-spread table for their evening meal, the wind and
wet outside were forgotten.

Elfie ran in and out of the rooms, delighted with the quaintness of it
all, and Clare grew quite enthusiastic over the carved wood decorations.

'He must be an artist,' she exclaimed.  'How could he go off and leave
it all to strangers?'

The rooms, though lacking as yet in all the details of comfort, were
quite habitable, and the late dinner was a merry meal.

'We shall be a community of women, with no opportunities of getting
away from one another occasionally; that is what I object to,' said
Clare, leaning back in her chair, and looking at her sisters rather
meditatively.  'If we quarrel, it will be dreadful, and I am perfectly
certain we shall never agree on every point.'

'_You_ will not on _any_ point,' said Gwen, a little drily.

'We have the country round us,' put in Elfie, 'and there must be some
people to know; it is only just at first we shall be shut up to
ourselves, I expect.'

'As to the people, there will be the villagers, of course,' said Gwen
briskly; 'but we needn't count upon many friends in our own class of
life.  The big houses round here won't be desirous of the acquaintance
of four unknown females with a very small income.'

'I always thought,' said Elfie, 'that country villages contained a
clergyman and family, a doctor, and a squire.  Isn't that the case
here?'

'No; this is a kind of suburb of Brambleton.  There is a vicarage, but
I don't know anything about the clergyman.'

'Well, I hope we shan't all die of the dumps,' said Clare, shivering
slightly, as a fresh blast of wind howled and shrieked in the old
chimney.

'Oh, that dreadful wind, how I hate it!  It seems like a bad omen to
have such a welcome when we get here.'

'Rubbish!  Go to bed, if you don't like it, and put your head under the
clothes.  Of course we notice the wind more in the country because of
the trees.'

Clare did not get much sympathy from her sisters, and she soon left
them and went up to her bedroom.  There was a bright fire burning, and
some of her own pretty things were already being unpacked by the busy
Jane, who was perhaps more attached to her than to any of the others.

'Captain Knox thinks her the best of the bunch,' said she in confidence
to Martha, when on the subject of 'our young ladies,' 'and so do
I--Miss Agatha is rather commonplace, to my mind, though she is a good
mistress, and Miss Gwendoline is always catching up one and taking
one's breath away.  Miss Elfrida is very pleasant, but she's always the
same.  Now Miss Clare's never two days alike; she's that gentle and
appealin' sometimes, that she makes me love her, and then she's miles
away in the clouds, and very cross, and then her spirits get so high
that she's ready for any mischief--and there's no knowin' how to take
her.'

'Isn't the wind dreadful, Jane?' said Clare presently.  'We couldn't
have had a more dreary and depressing day for coming here.'

'It's terrible lonely, miss.  How you young ladies will put up with it
is more than Martha and me can imagine!  My home is in the country, so
I don't mind it.  I never could abear London with its fog and dirt.
Mrs. Tucker has been telling me and Martha queer tales about the
gentleman who lived here.'

Clare wrapped herself in her dressing-gown and sat down by the fire.
She rarely checked Jane's flow of talk, and perhaps that was why the
maid liked her.

'What kind of tales?'

'Mrs. Tucker says he ought to have the property here called The Park,
for he is the eldest son, and his younger brother, Major Lester, has
taken it all, for Mr. Tom Lester offended his father by marrying a
foreign lady, and he struck him out of his will.  Mrs. Tucker says she
believes the quarrel last autumn was about Major Lester's son, who is
missing somewhere abroad, and who Mr. Tom Lester hates.  And did you
hear about the cupboard downstairs?  Mrs. Tucker says she never has
been inside it herself, for Mr. Lester only used to open it late at
night, and he's gone away and taken the key with him, and says it isn't
to be touched.  I says to Mrs. Tucker that there might be anything in
the cupboard, and Martha says she's afraid to go near it, for you do
hear such dreadful tales about locked cupboards, and skeletons inside
them, don't you, miss?'

'Only in your penny novelettes, that do you more harm than good, Jane!'
said Clare a little shortly.   I think if Mrs. Tucker is such a gossip,
we shan't care to have her about the house.  Where does she live now?'

'She's going to stay with her married sister in Brambleton, miss, and
she's going out cooking if she can.  I says to Martha that her tongue
runned away with her, we could hardly get in a word, she talks so; but
she's a very good-natured person, and has given Martha and me a lot of
information about the neighbourhood.'

Clare did not respond, but soon dismissed Jane, and then sat for some
time in dreams before her fire.  At last with a little sigh she took
hold of her Bible, to have her usual evening reading out of it.  She
turned to Nannie's Psalm, and listlessly scanned the verse that had
been given her.

'Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for Him.'

'Rest!' she mused; 'it is the one thing I never have really
experienced.  I always seem to be wishing for, and wanting, what never
comes to me.  I don't suppose any but a very old person who has lived
her life, and has no hopes left, can rest and wait patiently.  I don't
know why I always seem waiting for something big to come and satisfy my
life.  I remember when first Hugh spoke to me, and we were engaged, I
hoped I should be perfectly satisfied and happy, but in some ways he
has disappointed me.  He is so--so humdrum and easily pleased, and
wrapped up in his profession.  I wish he were more intellectual.  I do
love him, of course I do, but he hasn't filled my life as I thought he
would.  He doesn't understand some of my thoughts about things.  I
often wonder why I can't be as easily pleased with everybody and
everything as Elfie is.  Nannie would say it is because my religion is
not real.  I don't feel I could rest in the Lord.  He seems far away,
and there are so many difficulties, and sometimes I get to doubt
everything!  I wish I had Nannie's faith.'

She sighed again, and her thoughts came back to her present
surroundings.

'I never shall like it here, I am sure; only it is no good to say so.
It is such a depressing house, with not a sound outside, except this
howling wind.  I think it was a very doubtful venture coming down to a
place where we know no one.  Perhaps in the summer it will be better.
I will try and not be discontented, but I feel to-night as if evil is
coming upon us, and this awful wind seems to moan like a human being in
the chimney.  I think I will get into bed, and follow Gwen's advice.
Oh dear, I wish I wasn't so easily depressed!'

But a sound night's rest made impressionable Clare view things rather
differently the next day.  The rain and wind had disappeared, and as
she looked out of her window the first thing, she saw a cloudless blue
sky, and the green meadows and pine woods in the distance, all lying in
still bright sunshine.  She opened her casement, and the fresh spring
air fanned her cheeks, and brought her scents of the sweet country
round her.  She came downstairs to breakfast radiant; not even Elfie's
sunny face could eclipse hers.

'It's delicious!' she exclaimed; 'I am longing to explore the garden.
Is it as well stocked with fruit and vegetables as the advertisement
led us to expect?'

'Yes, I think it is,' said Gwen; 'but of course everything has been
very neglected.  Mrs. Tucker assures me a nephew of hers always worked
for Mr. Lester, and would be glad to come to us for the same wages.
What do you think, Agatha?  Can we afford eight shillings a week?'

Agatha looked a little worried.

'Oh, there is plenty of time to think of the garden later on.  There is
so much to do in the house.  I hope you will all help in the unpacking
to-day, or we shall never get straight.'

'Household cares already beginning!' said Elfie, laughing.  'Now I vote
we all take a holiday this lovely day, and explore our surroundings;
there's time enough to put the house straight later on.'

'Agatha will be miserable till every pin finds its place,' said Gwen.
'I promise that I'll work like a horse all this morning, but this
afternoon I will have for pleasure.'

And this was how they finally settled it; and all four spent their
morning in putting up curtains, hanging pictures, superintending the
carpets and rugs being laid down, and sorting out and distributing the
linen, plate, and china as it was needed.

Clare and Elfie sang as they worked, Gwen directed, scolded, and joked
in turn, and Agatha was the only one who seemed to feel it a grave and
solemn responsibility.

But they sat down to their luncheon with light hearts.

'We only want to fill the house with flowers to make it look really
comfortable,' said Clare, 'and I mean to go and look for some this
afternoon.'

Agatha could not be persuaded to leave the house.  Housekeeping was her
forte, and she declared she would never sit down in comfort, till her
store and linen cupboards were in perfect order.

The three others wandered first through the garden, and Gwen declared
her intention of taking the whole of it under her superintendence.

'You don't know a thing about it,' said Elfie, saucily.

'Then I can learn.  We are not going to live in the lap of luxury here,
as you will soon discover.  Our two maids will be rather different to
our staff of servants in London.'

'Well, I tell you what I will do,' said Elfie: 'I'll help Martha with
the cooking; I did a lot in Germany.  I'll send you in the most
delicious tea-cakes and biscuits for afternoon tea, and I'll teach her
how to cook her vegetables after the German fashion!'

'Defend us from German grease, and odious mixtures of sweet and sour!'
exclaimed Clare.  'Make us the tea-cakes, but leave the vegetables
alone.  Now take us down the village, Gwen, and let us see the church.'

They left the garden, and picked their way down the muddy lane until
they reached the village street.  Clare and Elfie were delighted with
all they saw, especially with the old church.  It had a typical country
churchyard, with a large yew tree inside the old lych gate.  The door
was open, so they went in, and, though plain and rather bare in
appearance, it possessed a beautiful stained window at the east end,
several old tombs, and a handsome-looking organ.  Elfie pressed forward
eagerly to look at the latter, and found to her delight that it was
open.  Music was her passion, and she was almost as skilful at the
organ as at her piano or with her violin.

'I must try it,' she whispered; 'do blow for me, one of you!'

Gwen complied with her request immediately, and strains of Mendelssohn
and Handel were soon filling the church.  Clare was wandering dreamily
round listening and enjoying it, when suddenly a harsh voice behind her
startled her.

'And may I ask who has given you permission to touch the organ?'

'I am not touching it,' Clare responded, coolly, gazing in astonishment
at the apparition before her.

An old lady with a cap awry on her head, green spectacles, and a large
shawl flung round her, stood tapping the ground impatiently with a
walking-stick.

'I don't wish to meet with impertinence; your party are taking an
unwarrantable liberty.  I wish, if my brother persists in keeping the
church doors open, that he would keep a chained bulldog inside!
Nothing else will keep you tourists in your place.  And here am I
without a bonnet, defying St. Paul's command, and getting a fresh
attack of rheumatism, and perhaps palpitation of the heart, by my haste
and exposure!  Will you have the goodness to tell your friends to leave
that organ alone?'

Elfie, hearing voices, now turned round and left her seat at once.

Clare was not trying to soothe the old lady, but rather seemed to enjoy
her irascibility.

'No, madam, we are not tourists.  Are you the verger's wife?  You must
excuse my ignorance, but we are strangers in this part.  Perhaps you
can tell us a little about the church; it seems a very old one.  How
many years has it been standing?'

For answer the old lady raised her stick and tapped her slightly on the
shoulder with it.

'Leave the church, young woman, and don't try to make me violent in the
house of God!'

They were in the porch by this time, and Elfie and Gwen joined them.
Elfie at once tried to make peace.

'I am very sorry,' she said contritely.  'I am so fond of the organ
that I could not resist trying it.  Please forgive me; I will not do it
again unless I have permission.'

She smiled so sweetly as she spoke that the old lady seemed a little
softened.

'You will never get my permission,' was all she said; and then she
hobbled away like some malignant fairy, disappearing through a little
wicket gate at the end of the churchyard, and making Gwen exclaim, 'She
must be the clergyman's mother or aunt.  Well, we have had a pleasant
introduction!  What will Agatha say?'




CHAPTER IV

Bluebeard's Cupboard

'O most lame and impotent conclusion!'--_Shakespeare_.


Agatha was naturally very vexed when she heard from her sisters what
had happened.  She was sometimes laughed at by her friends for her
devotion to the clergy, and all her hopes of doing good were centred in
the country church and its organizations.

'It is most unfortunate,' she said; 'I was hoping that perhaps some of
them might call before Sunday, but really after such an encounter they
may totally ignore us.  It was not right to do such a thing, Elfie,
without permission.  I can't think how Gwen could have allowed it.'

'Well, really, I am not up in propriety and etiquette in such matters,'
was Gwen's rather impatient response.  'We are not in town now, thank
goodness!  In the country you are supposed to have a little freedom.
If they don't wish people to try the organ, they should not leave it
open, or they should chain a bulldog to the organ stool.  Wasn't that
her suggestion, Clare?  My dear Agatha, don't fuss yourself.  This old
woman must be quite a character, and would abuse anybody, I feel
certain.  We didn't tell her who we were, so if she comes to call on
you, we will keep out of the way.  She seemed half blind, so I don't
expect she would recognise us again.'

'Jane says she lives alone with her brother, who is unmarried,' said
Clare, 'and she is quite a Tartar in the village, though she is very
good in relieving the villagers' wants.'

'What does Jane know about it?'

'Oh, she gets her gossip from Mrs. Tucker, who also told her that Miss
Miller sees better through her green glasses than most people do
without any glasses at all!'

'Mrs. Tucker talks a lot of rubbish, I expect,' said Gwen, rather
loftily; then, changing the conversation, she said, 'I am going to
unpack my books now.  Who will come and help me?  I am longing to fill
up those empty bookshelves in Mr. Lester's study.  What a good thing he
left them as fixtures!'

'I will help you, if you like,' said Clare.  'Are you going to take
sole possession of that study, may I ask?'

Gwen looked across at her rather queerly.

'Not if you dispute it,' she said, with a little laugh.  'Agatha is in
love with the drawing-room.  She has already arranged a corner for
herself there; her writing-table in the west window, her work-basket
and books in the corner by it, and her pet canary is now singing
himself hoarse at the view he has from the window.'

'Yes,' Agatha replied, 'it is an ideal old maid's corner, and that is
where you will always find me, when my housekeeping duties are not
keeping me away.'

'I wish we could have a sitting-room each,' said Clare; 'we get so in
each other's way.'

'You can share the study with me when you want to be quiet,' said Gwen.
'I won't have you there if you talk!'

'You're quite the owner of it already, then?  And what are you going to
do, Elfie?'

'Oh, I shall be everywhere.  Agatha never minds my music.  I shall be
practising a good deal, and if I'm voted a bore, I shall take my violin
up to the bedroom.  You and Gwen are the blue stockings, so the study
will be given over to you.'

This seemed satisfactory.  Gwen was a great reader, and possessed
already a most valuable library.  She wrote essays for some periodical
occasionally, but would never bind herself to any steady contributions,
and she was never so happy as when deeply engrossed in some ancient
histories of Egypt or Nineveh.  The buried past had a fascination for
her, and perhaps she of all the others had most reason for regretting
the departure from London, for her constant visits to the reading-room
at the British Museum had been a keen delight and pleasure to her.
When quite a schoolgirl she used to say, with that masterful toss of
her head, 'I am quite determined that I will understand and master
every "ology" under the sun!'

And Gwen and her 'ologies' had been a perpetual joke in her family ever
since.  She had dabbled in a good many sciences--geology, astronomy,
architecture, physiology, botany, natural history, and archaeology all
had their turn, and she certainly seemed to get a good deal of interest
and amusement out of them all.  She announced to Clare, as a little
later they were seated on the study floor surrounded by pyramids of
books, that she intended to give her thoughts now to gardening and
agriculture.

'I have some delightful old books on horticulture, which I shall read
up,' she said enthusiastically; 'and there is an old Dutch writer
amongst them who gives the most minute directions for laying out a
flower and vegetable garden.  I have told Agatha I shall take the
garden into my charge.  I am certain I shall succeed with it.'

'Do you ever doubt your capability for doing anything?'

Clare put the question gravely.

'No, I don't think I do, except teach a Sunday school class!' said
Gwen, laughing.

'I sometimes feel I am incapable of living even,' said Clare dreamily.

Gwen stared at her.  These two understood each other better than one
would have thought possible with such opposite characteristics.  Clare
admired Gwen's intellect, and there were times when Gwen knew that
Clare had depths of which she knew nothing.  Reason and practical
common sense had full sway in the one, imagination and mysticism in the
other, and none of these qualities were tempered with real religion.

'You must be in the blues!' exclaimed Gwen, with a laugh.

'No,' said Clare, looking up, 'I am not, at all.  I am longing to be up
and doing, and leave some mark behind me as I go.  Is that Browning you
have in your hand?  Just let me look up a passage!'  Gwen laughed again
as she handed across the book.

'No hope for any more help from you, if you once get hold of him!'

And for an hour Clare sat amongst the piles of books with her fair head
resting against the carved cupboard, and not a word or sign could Gwen
get out of her.

Elfie spent her time in helping Agatha to unpack, and it was a very
tired little party that gathered round the drawing-room fire that
evening.

'I wonder,' said Clare, 'if we shall find we have made a mistake in
coming here.  It seems so very quiet, and different to either London or
Dane Hall.  When we used to stay there with Aunt Mildred, there was
always such a lot going on that it didn't seem quite like the country.'

'My dear Clare,' said Agatha quietly, 'you would be much happier
yourself, and would make others happier too, if you always made the
best of your circumstances.  I remember you used to complain at Dane
Hall of the frivolity and empty-headedness of aunt's visitors, and
would say it was a mere waste of life to live as we did!'

'Oh, don't be so prosy, Agatha!' Clare returned impatiently.  'If you
were dropped into a workhouse ward, you would look round and remark how
comfortable you were, and how at last you had found your vocation!'

Elfie laughed aloud at this, but Agatha leant back in her chair and
looked into the glowing coals in front of her with a smile that showed
she was not destitute of humour.  'I daresay I might,' she said.  'I
always love a community of old women, and if I could have chats with
them, I am sure I should enjoy myself.'

'Well, I only wish I could be so easily contented,' said Clare, in a
tone that showed she would be very sorry for herself if she were.  She
soon went off to bed, and Elfie followed, and then the two elder ones
drew their chairs together and had a confidential talk over ways and
means.

Agatha, though apparently apathetic at times and of a yielding
disposition, had not always been so.  When she first came home from
school, she had all the bright hopes and restless longings of a young
girl, and her aunt did all in her power to make life pleasant and
bright for her.  She went out into society, and was a general
favourite, owing to her sweet temper and extreme unselfishness.  Then
one came on the scene who attracted her heart from the first.  He was
an earnest, whole-hearted Christian man, a vicar of an East End parish,
and it was his influence that made Agatha view life in a different
light.  She vexed her aunt at first by gradually withdrawing from
gaieties, and it was only with great difficulty that she was given
permission to visit in the slums.  The vicar was soon her betrothed,
and Agatha had a few months of perpetual sunshine.  But hard work, and
a not very strong constitution, soon brought about a serious
break-down, and he was ordered to the south of France to recruit his
health.  The parting was a sad one, and Agatha had wild thoughts of
marrying then and there, and going with him as his wife and nurse.  But
this Miss Dane strenuously opposed, and poor Agatha had to bear the
strain of five months away from the one who needed her so badly.  He
died, and for a time she was broken-hearted; but gradually she came to
prove the reality and comfort of her religion, and then, taking up the
interests of those around her, she had cheerfully buried her own
sorrow, and became the mainstay of her aunt and her household.  Perhaps
Agatha felt most keenly being shut out from her aunt's dying room, she
certainly uttered with heartfelt fervour morning and evening, 'Forgive
us our trespasses, as we forgive those that trespass against us.'

And she had never trusted herself to mention her cousin's unjust
dealing to anyone; even her sisters had little idea how deep her
feelings were about it.

The next few days were very busy ones.  Saturday brought Captain Knox,
to stay with them till Monday, and Clare showed him over house and
garden in the best of spirits.  'It is rather strange,' he said, as he
sat at dinner with them that night, 'but one of my sisters knows a lady
in this neighbourhood, and she thinks you will like her.  She lives
somewhere on the outskirts of Brambleton.  A Miss Villars.  She is a
charming woman, I hear, very comfortably off, but rather eccentric in
the way she spends her money.  My sister wrote to her when she knew of
your arrival here, so you may have a visit from her soon.'

'Is she an old maid?' asked Elfie; 'because we have seen one, and, I
was going to say, don't want to see another.'

Clare related their adventure in the church, and Captain Knox was much
amused.

'I do not think there is anything queer about Miss Villars, except that
she is a very religious woman.'

'Is that queer?' questioned Clare, a little wistfully.

'No,' Agatha said very quietly; 'it ought not to be.'

'But it is in the sight of the world,' retorted Captain Knox; 'that is,
if your religion in an aggressive one.'

'Well, of course it ought not to be aggressive,' said Gwen briskly.
'Religion is a matter to be lived, not talked about.  It only concerns
oneself, and no one else.'

'That is a very selfish creed,' said Agatha.  'If you possess something
good, you ought to wish to pass it on.'

'But not to thrust it on people who don't want it.  I am thirsty, and
like a glass of water, but need I insist upon your drinking it, when
you are not thirsty at all?'

'Gwen loves an argument,' said Captain Knox good-naturedly.

'I am not good at arguing,' said Agatha, 'only, knowing that thirst can
be a blessing, I think we should try to make people thirsty.'

'How do you mean?' asked Clare with interest, 'thirst is not,
generally, a very happy experience.'

'Doesn't it say, "Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be filled"?'

'Oh, come, Agatha, we don't want a sermon with our dinner.  You are not
given to preach, so don't be trying to show us that you know how to be
aggressive.'

Gwen's tone was a little scornful, and Agatha said no more; but as
Clare was pacing up and down in the verandah with Captain Knox, a
little time after, she suddenly said, 'I think I am a thirsty person,
Hugh, only I never can tell what it is I am thirsting for; tell me, are
you perfectly satisfied with yourself and with life?'

Captain Knox looked down at the sweet, pensive face of his betrothed.
'I shall be, Clare--on our wedding day.'

Clare frowned.  'You never will be in earnest about anything; you
always turn my thoughts into ridicule.'

'Indeed I do not.  But I am a plain, matter-of-fact soldier, and live
on earth; you are in dreamland half your time, or in the clouds.
Clare, darling, I cannot bear the thoughts of Africa sometimes; how
shall I be able to stand being away from you so long?  And time is
slipping away so fast; only a fortnight more before I am off.'

'You will come down again before you start, of course?'

'Oh yes, I certainly intend to do so; but I have a lot to do in
town--it may be only the last day that you will see me.'

Clare sighed, but said nothing, and then Captain Knox said suddenly,--

'Is Agatha very religious, Clare?

'No, I don't think so--not particularly.  She is fond of church and all
that, but she doesn't often speak out as she did at dinner to-night.
Now, don't let us be gloomy; come indoors, and I will show you
Bluebeard's cupboard in the study, It is well worth looking at, for it
is beautifully carved, and I am going to try and copy it.  You know how
I love carving.'

She took him to the study, and there, by the aid of a lamp, they
examined the old oak cupboard in the deep recess at the side of the
fireplace.

'The strange thing is that there seems to be no lock or opening at all
to it,' said Clare.  'I have spent hours in trying to find out where it
is opened.  Do you think one day I shall touch a spring, the doors will
fly open, and there we shall see his headless wives?'

She was laughing now, and full of animation.  Captain Knox passed his
fingers lightly across the carving.

'I expect one of these carved bits is movable,' he said.  'It is a
handsome bit of handicraft.  What is this along the bottom, a scroll
with writing?'

'That is what I say it is; Gwen says not, but I am sure those
hieroglyphics mean something.'

It looks like Arabic characters,' said Captain Knox with interest.  'I
believe it is so.  Here, stop a minute; let me copy these in my
notebook.  I shall be studying Arabic on my way out, and if I find I
can translate this, I will let you know.'

'Perhaps it is a clue to the mystery,' said Clare, with shining eyes;
'I am dying to know what this cupboard contains.  Mrs. Tucker said she
never saw it opened the whole time she was here; but Mr. Lester told
her once that he prized this cupboard more than anything else in the
house.  She thinks, foolish woman, that it is full of gold!  I only
hope she won't spread that notion about Brambleton.  The next thing
will be that we shall have thieves in the house, and perhaps be all
murdered in our beds!'  Captain Knox laughed at her fears, and soon
after, they joined the others in the drawing-room.




CHAPTER V

A Quiet Sunday

  'O day most calm, most bright,
  The fruit of this, the next world's bud.
      *      *      *      *
  The week were dark, but for thy light,
  Thy torch doth show the way.'--_G. Herbert._


The sisters, accompanied by Captain Knox, made quite a sensation in the
little village church when they entered it on that Sunday morning.  The
old sexton fussed about as if all the seats were occupied; but
eventually they were shown into one just beside the pulpit stairs.
Miss Miller glared at them through her green spectacles, and Elfie felt
miserably conscious that she had recognised them.  There were a few
other gentle-people in the church besides themselves, and a very fair
sprinkling of farmers and villagers.  The service was simple and
hearty; the village schoolmaster played the organ, and Mr. Miller, a
fine-looking, grey-headed man, delighted Agatha at least, by his
earnest, faithful preaching.  Coming out into the churchyard, Agatha
was stopped by Miss Miller hastening up to her.  She was dressed in
black silk; but her bonnet, a wonderful erection of lace and ribbon,
was quite awry, and she seemed agitated.  She spoke jerkily, and Agatha
had difficulty in preserving her usual equanimity of mind.

'Excuse me, but I believe you have taken Mr. Tom Lester's house--a most
unsatisfactory parishioner he is, and not at all what he should be.  I
am hoping to call on you this week.  Who is the gentleman? your
brother?  No?  A great pity, then, for a houseful of women is only a
hot-bed for scandal and gossip.  We have too many women by far in this
neighbourhood--a bachelor parson always draws them.  Have you any
acquaintances in the neighbourhood?  Ah, so much the better.  There is
service at half-past six this evening; I hope you will be regular
attendants.  You live in a godless house; take care that the atmosphere
does not affect you.  Mr. Tom Lester never entered the House of God
after I spoke to him about the irreverence of his yawns during the
sermon!  Good-bye, and I hope you will prove pleasant neighbours.  That
remains to be seen!'

She darted away as quickly as she came; and Elfie, who was walking with
Agatha, gave one of her merry, rippling laughs.

'Isn't she an odd character?  We shall have a good deal of fun out of
her, I am sure!  I am thankful she did not recognise me, or at least
had the good taste not to appear as if she did.'

'I wonder,' said Agatha thoughtfully, 'if that old man who sat behind
Miss Miller was our landlord's brother.'

'Oh, he was much too nice-looking; I imagine the other Mr. Lester is an
awful old curmudgeon.  He has got his property unjustly, I
consider--the eldest son ought to have it.'

'Cousin James is not an old curmudgeon,' put in Gwen, stepping back to
join in the conversation; 'supplanters and usurpers generally carry all
the world before them, "like green bay trees," as the Psalmist says.  I
am sure our Jacob is most prepossessing in manner and appearance, like
his namesake.  History repeats itself!'

'Don't be bitter after church,' said Agatha, in her quiet voice.

Gwen laughed.  'I'm not bitter.  I feel I can snap my fingers at him
now!  Hugh says he saw him in town the other day, and he said with his
pleasant smile, "When we are quite settled at Dane Hall my wife will
ask the girls down.  They will be glad of the change, I expect, after
their seclusion in the country!"  Wasn't it truly kind and considerate
of him?'

That first Sunday in the country was a very pleasant one to the
sisters, Clare went off for a long walk with Hugh in the afternoon;
Agatha settled herself in a wicker chair with her books in the sunny
verandah overlooking the meadows and distant pine woods; and Gwen and
Elfie wandered off across the fields, enjoying the sweet spring air,
and noting all the spring flowers peeping out of the hedgerows.

'Yes, I'm thankful we are out of town,' said Gwen emphatically,
standing up and drawing in long breaths of content and satisfaction.
'If I were starving, I would rather be in the country, because one can
be clean.  It's the oppression in the atmosphere that is so sickening
in London, and never being able to get away from people!'

'This is an ideal Sunday,' said Elfie, turning her radiant face upwards
and watching a lark soaring out of sight; 'I don't think I shall miss
the concerts in town, with such music as this around one!'

Then after a pause she said, 'I suppose becoming lazy and
self-indulgent is a danger in the country.'

'We are not rich enough for that,' responded Gwen with a short laugh;
'at least, I know I have my work cut out for me.'

'I wasn't meaning actual daily duties, but our responsibilities
regarding others,' said Elfie, a little shyly.

Gwen shrugged her shoulders.  'I suppose you feel you ought to be in
Sunday school this afternoon, is that it?  I dare say Miss Miller will
give you some parish work, if you ask her.  Are you going to follow in
Agatha's steps?  I saw her from my bedroom window this morning stop a
carter going by from the farm, and hand him some tracts.'

Elfie laughed.  'She's a good old thing; she never says anything about
her good deeds, but I know she will soon be fast friends with all the
farm labourers who pass up and down.  You see if next week she doesn't
know all their names and family histories!'

They were crossing a fresh meadow now, and as they came up to a stile,
they saw in the next field a most picturesque little cottage standing
in the midst of a mass of apple blossom.  It was a low white-washed
building, with thatched roof and latticed windows, green shutters
opening back upon the wall.

The girls went up, and leaning against the gate, looked at it
admiringly; then started at the sight of two oldish women sitting
opposite one another in the old-fashioned porch.  They were dressed
exactly alike, two lilac sun-bonnets hiding their faces; their figures
were thin and angular, and each had a book in her lap.  Their dark-blue
serge gowns, white aprons, and little red worsted shawls over their
shoulders, were duplicates one of the other.

'It's like a book,' whispered Elfie.  'Do let us speak to them.  We can
ask them where the footpath leads to!'

Gwen opened the gate, and accordingly put the question.

Both women started to their feet, and one came forward.

'Where does this footpath lead to?  Why, to our cottage, and no
further, miss.'

She spoke respectfully, though rather shortly.

'I am afraid we have trespassed,' said Elfie, in her sweet, bright
tone; 'but we are strangers here, and are trying to find our way about.
What a lovely little cottage you have!'

'It's a tidy little place,' the woman responded, with an approving nod.
'Perhaps you'd like to come in and sit for a bit.  Patty and me don't
care for Sunday visitin', but you'll be the ladies from Jasmine
Cottage, I reckon?'

'Yes,' said Gwen, 'we will come in for a minute before we go back.'

They followed her into a spotlessly clean and tidy kitchen.  Patty drew
forward two chairs, and began to speak rather breathlessly.  'My sister
and me saw you in church to-day.  We said you were the new family; and
Deb is very good at upholsterin' and alterin' carpets, and doin' plain
needlework, and we thought maybe you'd be wantin' help that way, for
Deb goes to work by the day at most of the big houses round!'

'Tis the Lord's Day,' said Deb, giving her sister a sharp nudge with
her elbow; 'we'll not be talking business now.  Sit down, ladies.'

Gwen and Elfie exchanged amused glances.  Then Gwen said,--

'Well, we won't transact business now; but we want a workwoman badly,
and if you will come to the cottage tomorrow my sister will show you
any amount of carpets that need refitting.  But if I had a cottage like
this, away from all sound and sight of any human beings, I think I
wouldn't trouble to go out carpet-making!'

'You would if you wanted to keep your cottage,' said Deb brusquely.
Then, taking off her sun-bonnet and smoothing down her grey hair, she
sat down on an old oak settle beside the little cheery blazing fire,
and grasping her angular knees with each hand, she looked at Given a
little defiantly.

'Eight and forty year come next Christmas have Patty and I lived
together here, and never a year have we been behind our rent since
father died; but it have been done by downright hard labour.  And if
you and your people want new-laid eggs, or fresh spring chickens, or
honey from the comb, why, 'tis Patty that will supply you, as also milk
and butter from an Alderney cow.'

''Tis Sunday!' ejaculated Patty, as she stood by the fire with arms
akimbo; and at this retort Gwen and Elfie laughed outright.

'And do you ever go away from home?' asked Gwen curiously, after a
slight pause, in which Deb looked very discomposed.

'We are continually away,' said Deb, looking up and speaking very
shortly.  'I know every gentry's house in the neighbourhood, not to
speak of Brambleton, where Patty goes reg'lar once a week to market.
But as to sleepin' away, that we never mean to do till we be taken to
our last restin'-place!'

'And are you great readers?  I am afraid we disturbed you from your
books when we came in.'

Patty took up her book, which was on the window-ledge.  ''Tis Bunyan's
book, _The Pilgrim's Progress_.  Father give Deb and me a copy each
when we were fifteen years old, and we have read it every Sunday
afternoon since.  We don't always get very far, for 'tis a sleepy time
in the afternoon, but a page or two is always edifyin' and improvin' to
the soul!'

'It's a lovely book!' said Elfie enthusiastically; 'you must know it
nearly by heart.'

The sisters smiled at each other.

'We do that,' said Deb.

'I suppose you have visitors from the village here occasionally?' asked
Gwen.

Deb frowned grimly, then looked her questioner straight in the face,
with hard-set lines about her mouth, as she replied,--

'We keeps ourselves to ourselves, miss.  You are both young ladies, and
haven't lived long enough to have it cast up in your teeth that you're
not wed; but there be those who scorn us for choosin' to keep by each
other, and not do as most young maids do.  Patty and me have had our
chances, but Patty's lad couldn't take us both, and 'twas the same with
my lad, and neither of us could bear to be away from the other.  We've
always grown together, Patty and me--we came into the world together,
and we pray the Lord He'll take us out in the same manner; and we know
each other's ways, and when we don't agree, there's no one else to
interfere.'

'Do you ever disagree?' asked Elfie, smiling.

Patty nodded her head solemnly.

'Ay, we ain't quite the same make through and through,' she said, in
her little breathless way, 'and words run high at times.  I keep to my
opinions, and Deb keeps to hers; and if we have an extra hard dispute
on, we know how to settle it!'

'How? with fists?' asked Gwen, looking from one hard-featured woman to
the other with the greatest interest.

Deb looked up grimly, and said, as she raised her hand in emphasis,--

'Patty have never had a blow from me since we were children, nor I from
her.  When our tongues run away with us, one locks the t'other out, and
when we get cool again the door is opened!'

'I would rather be inside than outside on a winter's day,' said Gwen,
laughing heartily.  'Now come, Elfie, we must be off.  I shall pay you
another visit before long, to learn about bee-keeping.  I see your
hives are just like ours, and we know nothing about such things!'

'And I'll be very glad to tell you,' said Patty eagerly, 'for I've
tended bees since I were a child, and know all their tricks, and as to
their swarmings.'

''Tis the Lord's Day,' put in Deb grimly, and Gwen and Elfie promptly
took their leave.

'Aren't they old dears?' said Elfie enthusiastically; 'they seem to
live in quite another world.  Imagine reading _The Pilgrim's Progress_
all your life, and no other book beside the Bible!  Do they ever see a
newspaper, I wonder?'

'It isn't often one meets such a couple; we shall get a good deal of
entertainment out of them, I expect.  What an awful existence!  Is it
what we shall come to years hence, I wonder?  And yet I, for one, am
quite certain that will not be my lot.'

'What?' inquired Elfie, 'the old maid's existence, do you mean, or the
little secluded country cottage?'

'Neither.  I have my plans and purposes; and not all Jacob's
machinations and schemings will frustrate them.'

'What are they?' inquired Elfie.

'Ah, well, I had best not say.  I mean to see you all thoroughly
comfortable and settled here, and then break them to you.  I have
plenty of resources and interests to take up my time, so am in no
hurry.'

'You always were a wonderful one for plans!  Let me guess.  You are
going to start a magazine, and be the editor of it!'

'No, thank you.  Magazines are as plentiful as pins just now; they
appear and disappear like sky-rockets!'

'Is it a way of earning money?'

'No, of spending it; but I am not going to tell you.  I generally find
I can carry out my plans successfully, if I don't take too many people
into my confidence!'

Elfie was silent for a few minutes; then she said, with a little sigh,
'I wonder how old Nannie is getting on?'

'What has put her into your head?'

'The verses she gave us.  Don't you remember?'

'I'm sure I forget what mine was.'

'"Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in Him, and He shall bring
it to pass,"' said Elfie softly.

'Nannie never could stand my independence.  I believe she thought we
ought not to have taken this cottage without first having prayer about
it!'

'Agatha did pray about it,' said Elfie very quietly.

'Well, I didn't, and I was the one to find it, and it has turned out
quite a success.  I never can understand such narrow views of life as
Agatha takes.  Prayer is all very well in church, or in great crises,
but in everyday life I think it is perfectly unnatural and unnecessary!'

Elfie did not answer.  She felt too inexperienced to argue the matter
out with Gwen, though she totally disagreed with her.

They reached home, and found Clare and Captain Knox before them.
Afternoon tea was had in the drawing-room, and afterwards, before
evening church, Elfie brought her violin out, and Agatha went to the
piano, whilst the others gathered round and sang some hymns with them.
The evening closed quietly and peacefully; and as Captain Knox said
good-night to his betrothed, he added, 'I am so glad I have seen you
all here.  I shall picture your quiet Sundays when I am in the wilds of
Africa, and it will do me good!'




CHAPTER VI

A Departure

  'The heart which like a staff was one
  For mine to lean and rest upon,
  The strongest on the longest day,
  With steadfast love, is caught away,
  And yet my days go on, go on.'--_E. B. Browning._


Miss Miller came to call with her brother a few days afterwards.
Agatha and Elfie were busy putting some finishing touches to the
drawing-room when they arrived.

Miss Miller looked round the room, when she was seated, with some
interest; and then she said abruptly,--

'Too much furniture, and too many useless ornaments, my dears.  A
drawing-room ought to be for use, and not for show.  Who arranges your
flowers?'

She might well ask, for none but an artist's hand could have grouped
together so harmoniously the daffodils and primroses, with trails of
ivy and fern in their beds of moss.

'Clare does,' responded Elfie brightly, sitting down by her side,
whilst Agatha turned to the vicar.  'She went out this morning and
picked them in a wood close to us.  Aren't they lovely?'

'Not Major Lester's wood, I hope.  He will not be best pleased to have
any one from this house trespassing in his places.  Miss Dane, do you
know the history of your house?'

Agatha looked up, a little startled at the sharp voice.  'I did not
know it had any history,' she said.

'It is best you should know facts.  No, Wilfrid, you need not stop me;
they will hear our village gossip fast enough.  To begin with--your
house used to be the old vicarage.  It was built on the site of an old
monastery.  Our church is four hundred years old.  The monastery came
to grief long before the church.  When old Squire Lester died, most of
us thought the Hall would go to Mr. Tom.  He had always been erratic
and restless, spending most of his time abroad, and the squire never
forgave his marriage with a French artist's daughter.  He disinherited
him, and made his second son leave the army and come home.  A couple of
years after, Mr. Tom returned, having lost his wife, and bringing a
little son with him, a boy of four years.  The old squire seemed to
relent a little then, and was always having the child at the house.
Mr. Tom, as we call him here, settled in this house, and was on
friendly terms with his father till his death.  Major Lester then took
the property.  He had an only son, too; and the boys, being of the same
age, were much together; but their fathers would hardly speak to each
other, and were angry at the friendship between the boys.  I remember
being at Major Lester's the very day of the sad event.  I was calling
on Mrs. Lester, and we heard a violent altercation going on in the hall
between the brothers.  Mr. Tom had come up for his son, who had made
him anxious by his non-appearance at home the night before.  The lads
had been out for a night's rabbit-snaring with the gamekeeper, and
Alick had slept at the Hall without the major's knowledge.  I don't
know why this should have led to such a violent quarrel, but Alick was
summoned from the stables, where he was found with his cousin Roger,
and forbidden ever to put his foot on Major Lester's property again.
Then and there the lads were separated; but as Mr. Tom marched off with
his son, he shouted out to his brother, "You'll live to see my son
stand in Roger's shoes yet, and the property will come back to the
rightful heir!"

'I remember Mrs. Lester turning to me, and trembling like a leaf: "He
will murder Roger!  The dreadful man!" she exclaimed; "that is the only
way the property will come to Alick!"

'The very next day both boys were missing.  Mr. Tom seemed quite as
distracted as his brother, but he declared he knew nothing of them, and
for a month no tidings were received, in spite of all the detectives at
work.  Then came a letter from Alick, written for both of them, saying
they had taken their passage together for Australia, and had already
got the promise of being taken on a farm; for they were made so
miserable at home by the quarrels of their fathers, that they had
"determined to clear out of it," and nothing would separate them from
each other.  They have not been in this neighbourhood since; but last
autumn news came that Roger had disappeared.  Alick wrote, giving
details:--"I think Roger was sent on some confidential errand by the
farmer, for he had money with him, and they fear that he was robbed,
perhaps murdered on the way."  Mrs. Lester, who was never very strong,
took to her bed, and died a fortnight after the news was brought to
her.  But before she died she emphatically declared that Mr. Tom and
his son had decoyed Roger out of the country to make away with him; and
Alick was solely responsible for his death.  She persisted in this
until the major more than half believed it; and two days after the
funeral he came down here, and had another most violent quarrel with
his brother.  It almost came to blows; and Mr. Tom decamped altogether
within a week from that time.  I only tell you the story.  Some people
here think badly of him, and his disappearance looks suspicious.  Of
course he gave out that he was going to Australia to find out the
rights of it; but Major Lester does not believe this.'

'I wonder Major Lester does not go out himself,' said Agatha, feeling
strangely interested in this story.

'He is too crippled by gout to do so.  He has put the matter into the
hands of the police out there.  It's a sad story.  The major is most
regular at church, and highly respected in the neighbourhood.  Mr. Tom
is most erratic; I believe he has been seen in the Methodist chapel
occasionally, but won't put his foot inside our church; and he is no
loss at all to the neighbourhood, for he lived the life of a recluse.
I always look upon this house as an ill-omened place.  I didn't tell
you that the last vicar who lived here died of delirium tremens.  He
was a disgrace to his profession, but that was thirty years ago.  The
new vicarage was built shortly after.'  Miss Miller paused for breath,
and her brother remarked, 'You must not prejudice the Miss Danes,
Deborah, against their house.  It is a quaint place, and its past need
not be recorded.'

'We are charmed with it,' said Agatha simply; 'and we have moved into
it at the right time.  Spring in the country is always so delightful.'

Miss Miller was more agreeable when visiting than Agatha had hoped for,
and though she insisted on the monopoly of the conversation, and gave
the good vicar little chance of putting in a word, yet Agatha felt that
they would be pleasant neighbours.  There was a good deal of discussion
over the Lesters' history, but Gwen dismissed the subject in her usual
way.

'Major Lester is another Jacob.  There's nothing more to be said, and
Mr. Tom is a much-abused and misunderstood man!'

Agatha began to settle into her new life very happily.  She became
engrossed in housekeeping for several hours every morning, and was
delighted to hear of a seamstress who could come in and work by the
day.  Deb Howitt was sent for, and she proved a skilful and industrious
needlewoman, and amused and interested all who came in contact with her
by her quaint remarks.

'Yes,' she remarked to Gwen, who had strolled into Agatha's bedroom one
morning, and found Deb seated on the floor shaping a refractory carpet
that would not fit, 'my sister is the stay-at-home, and I bring her the
news of the world as I pick it up when I'm out visitin'.  It's
surprisin' the stories of high and low life that I hear.  I take it all
in, and think it over while I'm stitchin', and come to many a wise
conclusion before I take it back with me and talk it over with Patty.'

'And what conclusion will you come to about us?' asked Gwen.

The old woman nodded her head with a meaning smile.

'Ay, well, ye're a house full of women, and there's an astonishin'
little scoldin' and quarrellin'.  I should say, taking the cluster of
you together, that the one at either end keeps the peace in the middle.'

Gwen laughed delightedly.  'You are right: Agatha and Elfie are the
peace-makers, Clare and I the disturbing elements!  What else?'

But Deb shook her head, and would say no more.

Clare and Gwen shared the study very amicably together, but both were
out of doors a great deal--Gwen tackling the untidy garden with a great
deal of energy, but little experience; and Clare wandering about the
lanes and fields, doing little, and dreaming much.  Then came Captain
Knox's farewell visit, and it was a very short one.  He appeared at
seven o'clock one evening, just as the sisters were sitting down to
their high tea, which meal they had substituted for the orthodox dinner
to which they had been accustomed in London.

Clare's cheeks grew pale as she greeted him.  'How long have you?' she
asked, a little breathlessly.

'Till eight o'clock to-morrow morning.  I must catch the 8.30 train
from Brambleton.  We sail to-morrow afternoon.'

It was rather a silent meal, and being a rough, stormy night Clare took
him off to the study directly afterwards.  She was in the mood that
pleased her lover best: sweet and gentle, and showing more affection
than she was wont to do, for she was not demonstrative usually.

'Hugh,' she said later in the evening, after sitting still and letting
him do most of the talking, 'I wish I were going with you.  I feel as
if this parting is going to be a long one.  I can't bear this wind and
rain to-night--it makes me feel as if something awful is coming; it was
just the same the first night we were here.  I have a kind of
presentiment about your going, as if something evil is coming upon us.
Couldn't you give it up?'

Captain Knox smiled a little, though his face looked troubled as he
drew her closer to him.

'My darling, you would not really wish me to.  We must look forward to
six months hence, when I return, and then, Clare, I shall wait no
longer.  You must come to me for good and all.'

Clare did not reply for a minute, then gently slipping her hand into
the strong one near her, she said, very wistfully, 'Hugh, don't you
think we should both have more comfort if we had more religion?  I
haven't enough of it to satisfy me, I think.  Now Agatha trusts
everything in her life to--to God, and is never worried or anxious.  I
can't do that, and oh, I'm so unsatisfied!  You don't know how restless
and wretched I feel sometimes!  I should like to be able to pray for
you properly when you are away, and feel that you were praying for me.'

Captain Knox was silent for a little, then he said quietly,--

'I have a certain amount of religion, as you know, and you couldn't
have too much for me, at least as long as you keep it to yourself.  I
think every woman is the better for being truly religious; but we men
who knock about amongst all kinds of evil, well, we can't expect to be
very devout.  It is soon knocked out of one.  Pray for me as much as
you like, darling; I need it!'

'I can't help thinking of Nannie's verse she gave me one evening,' said
Clare, with a little sigh: '"Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for
Him."  It sounds so nice; but I don't know how to do it.  And I am sure
I shall need patience till you come back again!'

'We must write to each other, and think of next autumn.  I shall not
forget to send you the translation of those characters on that old
cupboard.  I am convinced they are Arabic.'

'Oh, bother the cupboard!' was Clare's petulant retort.  'It is too bad
you are going away for so long, and you take it so coolly.  I don't
believe you mind a bit!'

Here she burst into a passion of tears, and poor Captain Knox, who was
controlling his feelings for her sake, almost gave way himself.

It was not a happy evening, and Clare cried herself to sleep that
night, feeling that she was the most unfortunate, wretched girl in the
world.  She crept down the next morning with a white face to give him
his early breakfast, and then drove to Brambleton station with him; so
no one saw the last parting.  When she returned, she went upstairs to
her room, and shut herself up for the rest of the morning.

'It is a pity Clare did not show her affection for him more when she
was with him,' said Gwen impatiently, when Agatha came to her in the
study, and wondered if she should go up and try to comfort her.  'I
often marvel at Hugh's infatuation for her.  I don't believe she knows
what real love is.  She is so taken up with her own feelings and moods,
that she has no time for his, and I think he is far too good for her.
If she is so discontented before marriage, what will she be afterwards?
He will have a miserable time of it, I am afraid!'

'You are too hard upon her!  I daresay his absence will prove to her
how truly she loves him, for I am quite sure she does.'

'I have no patience with her!' said Gwen shortly; and then she buried
herself in her book again, whilst Agatha went away and shed some tears
herself over Captain Knox's departure.




CHAPTER VII

Unrest

  'Thou hast made us for Thyself,
  And our hearts are restless
        till they rest in Thee.--_St. Augustine._


Some weeks passed.  The girls were perfectly satisfied with their quiet
country life.  Elfie brightened the whole house with her music and high
spirits.  Agatha soon found her way to the nearest cottages, and was
friends with all the farm labourers who passed by the house, and Gwen
tried to manage everything and everybody.  Clare shook off her low
spirits, but was uncertain-tempered, and would never settle at any
occupation for long at a time.  Still, she delighted in the country
round, and would return from her rambles with her arms full of Nature's
treasures, making the little house beautiful with her lovely flowers
and greenery.

Miss Miller fussed in and out, and was very glad of Agatha's help in
parish matters; even unbending so far as to give Elfie permission to
play on the organ in church, which, of course, delighted her.  Agatha
was informed that she could visit as freely as she liked, but that no
relief was to be given, except through the vicarage.

'I look after everybody myself.  I know the deserving and the
undeserving, and they know me!  I won't have anything given to my
parishioners without my knowledge.  My brother leaves it all in my
hands.'

One afternoon Miss Villars called, and found only Clare at home.  She
was a sweet-looking, attractive woman, and Clare, with her usual
impulsiveness, lost her heart to her at once.  She confided to her the
history of her engagement, and parting with Captain Knox; and the visit
lengthened into nearly an hour before Miss Villars took her leave.

Clare went into raptures about her, when talking to her sisters
afterwards.

'She is not a bit goody or eccentric, as Hugh hinted.  She talked and
laughed as naturally as any one; and she has such a lovely face.
Dresses very quietly, but with good taste; and is such a graceful
woman!  She is quite the nicest person I have met for a long time.  I
am dying to see her in her own home.  I am sure it must be a charming
one.  She drove over in an open carriage with a handsome pair of
horses; and has offered to take us for drives whenever we like.'

'We really must afford ourselves a small trap,' said Gwen.  'We cannot
do without it in the country.  If we had a donkey, it would be better
than nothing!'

'_I_ wouldn't go in a donkey-cart,' said Clare, with disdain.

'Then you could stay at home.  Agatha, what do you say?  We have a
stable.  How much will it cost, do you think?'

When once Gwen took a matter in hand, she generally carried it through;
and very shortly after, the sisters were the proud possessors of a
little two-wheeled trap, and a small rough pony.  This was a great
convenience as well as pleasure to them, and when Clare had a fit of
the blues, she would go off to Brambleton and do some shopping, and
return quite interested and eager to tell all she had seen and heard.
She met Miss Villars on one of her expeditions, and she asked her to go
and have a cup of tea with her before she returned home.  This Clare
willingly did.  She had not been to the house before, though Agatha and
Gwen had; but she found it quite answered her expectations.  It was an
ideal old-fashioned country house, and Miss Villars was a perfect
hostess.  She introduced Clare to a delicate-looking girl staying with
her: 'This is Miss Audrey Foster, who enjoys the country quite as much
as you do.'

'It is paradise to me,' said the girl enthusiastically.  'I am a
Londoner, and have never stayed in the country before.'

Clare looked at her, and noted that her shabby serge dress and pale
pinched face seemed strangely incongruous with her surroundings.  But
when she had left the room shortly afterwards, Miss Villars said: 'Miss
Foster is the eldest daughter of an East End vicar.  She has not had a
holiday or any change from home since her school-days; and she is
mother and governess to five younger brothers and sisters.  I hope to
send her back a different creature.  It is a great pleasure to give
pleasure to other people, is it not?'

'I don't think I ever have,' said Clare frankly.

'Ah, well, my circumstances have made it easy for me to do so.  My
house is too big to live alone in it, and so I have relays of young
visitors who need a little brightness in their lives.  It is so sad to
think of some young lives being cramped and dwarfed by their
surroundings; and some natures utterly sink beneath the burden of
household cares and anxieties, that ought not to touch them at all in
youth.'

'You are very good, Miss Villars, are you not?'

Miss Villars laughed brightly.  'Not at all, my dear child.  I wish I
were.'

'I wish I were too,' said Clare, with sudden impulse.  'You look so
happy--I wish I knew your secret.'

'"Happy is that people whose God is the Lord,"' said Miss Villars
softly.

Clare sighed.  'I never have found religion make me happy, Miss
Villars.'

'No more have I.  It is only the Lord Himself who can do that.  Do you
know Him as your Friend and Saviour?'

Clare had never had such a question put to her before.  'I don't know
Him at all,' she said earnestly; 'God seems such a long way off.'

'You know how you can get near Him?'

'By being very religious, I suppose.'

'The Bible doesn't say so.  It says this: "But now in Christ Jesus ye
who sometimes were far off are made nigh by the blood of Christ.  For
He is our peace, who hath made both one, and hath broken down the
middle wall of partition between us."  Think that verse over, dear, and
look it up in your own Bible.'

'But,' said Clare, hesitating a little, 'I don't think I want to be
brought nearer to God.  That has no attraction for me.'

'Then you will never know real happiness.  Any soul away from its
Creator knows no peace.'

Clare was silent, and then Miss Foster entered the room again, and the
subject was changed; but Clare had plenty of food for reflection as she
drove home.

It was a lovely afternoon in June--so warm that for once the four
sisters were together in the shady verandah outside the drawing-room
windows, taking their ease and waiting for their afternoon tea.  Agatha
was the only one who was doing anything, and she was stitching away at
some small garment for one of the farm carter's children.  It was a
still, drowsy afternoon; the very bees seemed too lazy to hum, and were
settling sleepily on the rose bushes close to their hives.

'This is the most sleepy time in the day,' observed Gwen, leaning back
in her low wicker chair, her head resting on her arms behind it, 'I
could go to sleep in five minutes if I chose; there is not a creature
moving for miles round us, I expect.'

'I love the stillness,' said Clare.  'Every one in the country has time
to rest.  How different it is in London!'

'I think we're all living very lazy lives,' said Elfie, as she picked a
climbing rose beside her and placed it in her belt; 'I feel as if every
day here is one long holiday!'

'Well, we are not at school,' returned Clare; 'and I beg to state I
have not been idle to-day.  Attending to the flowers in the house every
morning is no joke!  I was nearly two hours over them; then I wrote
letters and took them to the post before luncheon, and I have been
mending a dress, and tidying my cupboards since.'

Gwen laughed a little derisively.  'You will never die of hard work,
Clare.'

'I think it is harder work doing what I have done, than sitting still
in the same chair from ten o'clock to one, and simply reading and
writing!'

'Ted was asking for directions in the garden,' said Agatha, looking up;
'but when I peeped inside the study, Gwen, and saw you had one of your
writing crazes on, I knew it was no good coming to you.'

'No, he has plenty of work, and I shall be occupied in the morning for
some time now.'

'Why have you taken such a fit of it?' asked Clare.  'You're writing as
if for your life.'

'I want money,' was the brief reply.

'What for?'

'That I shall not tell you at present.  I want it so much, that I am
even condescending to write silly stories, which I despise myself for
doing.'

'Oh! that will be delightful,' exclaimed Elfie.  'Couldn't you read us
one now, to pass the time?'

'I will read you a kind of conundrum I have dashed off this morning to
amuse some sentimental goose like Clare!'

'Thank you,' said Clare imperturbably; and when Gwen sauntered into the
house to get her manuscript, she said, 'Gwen is preparing some surprise
for her family.  You mark my words; before long she will unfold a
startling plan of action!'

Gwen reappeared very soon, and settling herself in her easy chair,
began to read in a lazy and slightly mocking tone as follows:--


'The princess walks in her garden alone.  Her face is sad, and her
steps are slow.  She reaches a low moss-covered wall, and leaning upon
it gazes dreamily and wistfully upon the busy crowded city below.
Sounds of toil and labour meet her ears.  The busy multitudes are all
engaged in the various occupations of their spheres.  And whilst the
ringing laughter, the joyous mirth, of some is borne upwards by the
breeze, it is mingled with the sobs and bitter weeping of the neglected
and oppressed.  Stretching out her soft white hands, she clasps them in
piteous yearning.

'"My soul craves for it," she cries.  "Since first I became conscious
of its absence I am longing to find it.  If I could devote a lifetime
to it, and obtain it at last, I should die content!"

      *      *      *      *      *      *

'She stands in the deepest recess of a lonely forest.  Far away from
the city, no human habitation is near.  Her feet are on the
moss-covered ground, soft as velvet to the touch.  Above is a canopy of
green, through which the pure blue heavens appear, and the rays of the
setting sun are giving the stately elms and rugged oaks a golden beauty
of its own.  She is leaning against a copper beech, and her soft brown
hair is kissing the shining bark.  Her blue eyes are turned upwards,
full of expectancy and hope.  She stands like a beautiful statue.  A
squirrel darts up a tree close by, and rabbits sport amongst the fallen
leaves.  The birds are carolling forth their evening hymns of praise,
and Nature seems to be parading its loveliness.  But her face is
sorrowful still, and she shakes her head dejectedly.  "It is of no
avail," she murmurs; "even here in such a scene I cannot obtain my
heart's desire!  I yearn more for it day by day, and yet with the
crushing longing within my breast I seem further away than ever from
it!"

'She turns, and retraces her steps to the home of her forefathers.

      *      *      *      *      *      *

'A luxuriously furnished apartment; cool and refreshing after the glare
of the sun outside.  The Venetian shutters are closed.  Sweet-scented
flowers are filling the room with their perfume.  The sound of
children's happy voices, as they roam through the meadows and play in
the new-mown hay, the humming of bees, sipping their honey from the
full-blown flowers, come in at the open windows.  Upon a couch in the
darkest corner of the room lies our princess.  She is not asleep; her
hands are folded listlessly across her breast, her lips are moving.
Now burying her face in the cushions, she exclaims:--

'"No, I have it not.  Methought I might find it even here.  No
happiness for me until I experience it  All the gold I possess would I
gladly give to have the exquisite pleasure of obtaining and realizing
it!"

      *      *      *      *      *      *

It is night-time.  She stands upon the summit of a hill alone, and her
figure looks weird and ghostly in the silver moonlight.  Her head is
thrown back, her lips parted breathlessly; her whole attitude bespeaks
eager and intense expectation.  She is waiting and watching for the
desire of her heart.

'She overlooks the city, now wrapped in slumber.  Green plains stretch
away in the dim distance, and the moon throws its light upon her
upturned face, making fantastic shadows around her.  Hark!  From yonder
tree the nightingale trills out her midnight song.  She listens and
does not move, but hears it to the end.  It ceases, and the wind rushes
through the long grass at her feet, and shakes the leaves above, even
venturing with its lawless impudence to buffet her fair brow, and
scatter her brown locks across her eyes.  A deep sigh escapes from her
heaving breast.  "It is hopeless.  I am well-nigh despairing.  Whither
shall I go?  I will not be conquered.  I must find, and will find it
soon!"

      *      *      *      *      *      *

'Again we see her.  In a grotto, deep in the heart of the earth.  She
is seated on a rock, and all is darkness save a faint ray of light that
creeps through a small crevice overhead.

'No one is near.  No living creature but herself, and she is still
seeking and waiting for what she has not found.  Water is trickling
drop by drop from the moist roof above; the atmosphere is damp and
close, yet little she heeds the discomfort of her surroundings, and
heavy sighs come from her lips.  She looks up at last, then wends her
way still further into the innermost recess of the cavern.  She stands
beneath a deep vaulted roof, in deeper darkness, but in drier
atmosphere, and here she pauses, a light coming into her sad blue eyes,
and for the first time a smile hovering about her lips.  A quiver of
excitement, a thrill of suppressed awe vibrates through her nervously
strung frame.  "At last," she murmurs; "if nowhere else, I shall find
it here."

'Her heart throbs violently, and in vain she places her hand upon it to
still its beating.  Moments pass in anxious hope, then suddenly she
sinks to the ground in a passion of sobs and bitter weeping.

'"No, no, poor weak fool that I have been," she breaks forth, in
disdainful self-contempt; "never in this life shall I obtain it, for
outward circumstances influence it little.  How vainly deluded I have
been hitherto!  Little did I imagine that the very longing and craving
of my heart for it, would thereby prevent my possessing it!"

'She leaves the cavern, and returns to her home a wiser woman.'


Gwen folded her manuscript up quietly, adding indifferently, 'Now what
was it she wanted?'

'I should say, "Work,"' remarked Agatha in her matter-of-fact way.
'She seems to have been a most idle young person.'

'Rest and contentment,' murmured Clare, looking at Gwen with dreamy,
thoughtful eyes.

'Sleep, perhaps,' suggested Elfie.

'You're all wrong.'

'Tell us then.'

'She wanted silence.'

And humming an air, Gwen walked into the house without another word.

Elfie began to laugh.  'What a queer subject!  Gwen never does write
like other people.  There is no moral at all.'

Neither of the others spoke for a little.  Then Agatha said, folding up
her work, 'It may take in certain magazines, but I think she writes far
better when she keeps to facts, not fancies.'

'It has a moral,' said Clare, looking away over the meadows.

'What is it?' asked Elfie, regarding her curiously.

'Failure is in self, not circumstances!'

After which slow denunciation, Clare also moved into the house, and
when she reached her bedroom she murmured to herself, 'And I know all
my unrest and discontent come from within me.  It is not my
surroundings.  Miss Villars must be right.'




CHAPTER VIII

Entertaining a Stranger

        'In all things
  Mindful not of _herself, but bearing_ the burden
    of others.'--_Longfellow._


It was Sunday evening.  Agatha sat by the drawing-room window, her
Bible on her lap, and her thoughts far away from things of earth.  All
the rest of the household were at church, and she was enjoying the
stillness around her.  The sun was setting just behind the pine trees
in the distance, and shedding a rosy glow upon their slender stems; the
hush of night seemed to be falling on all Nature, and Agatha was so
wrapped up in her thoughts, that she did not notice the figure of a man
quietly and swiftly approaching the house.  She was the more startled
when a voice broke upon the stillness; and she looked up to see a man
standing close outside the window.

'Pardon me, madam, but will you kindly allow me to enter?  I wish to
have a few words with you.'

Visions of housebreakers, robbing, and perhaps murdering, if their
wishes were denied them, flitted through Agatha's perturbed mind.  She
knew she was alone in the house, and beyond the reach of any help; she
also realized that all the three French windows leading out to the
verandah were open; but, nevertheless, she showed a brave front.
Without rising from her seat, she looked the intruder straight in the
face.

'Perhaps, if you will make known your errand, I will comply with your
request.  You are at present a perfect stranger to me.'

Her visitor smiled.  He was an elderly man, with a stoop in his
shoulders, and a rather shabby great-coat buttoned tight up under his
chin.

'My errand might startle you,' he said; 'I wish to get at something in
the study cupboard.'

Poor Agatha's heart beat loudly.  'That you cannot do without the
owner's consent,' she replied sternly, 'and he is at present abroad.'

Then with a little old-fashioned bow the stranger took off his hat.

'No, madam, he is not abroad.  He is before you!'

Agatha stared at him.  She saw rather kindly-looking blue eyes peering
at her through thick shaggy eyebrows; a care-worn, smooth-shaven face,
with a very broad intellectual brow, and a smile that somehow or other
disarmed her suspicions.

'Are you--are you sure?' she faltered stupidly.

'Sure that my name is Thomas Lester, and that instead of being a tramp
or burglar molesting a lonely woman, I am now respectfully soliciting
admission into my own house?  Yes, madam, I assure you on the honour of
a gentleman that I am no impostor!'

Agatha rose at once.  'Then please come in, and forgive my suspicions.
I never heard of your return.'

'No,' he said, stepping inside and quietly taking a seat; 'I came back
hurriedly, and did not wish my visit here to be known.  That is why I
chose to come down from London to-day, for I knew my respected brother
would be safely and piously conducting his devotions in church.  Have
you made his acquaintance, Miss Dane?'

'No, he has not called upon us.'

'And you have seen nothing of my son?  Do you know my story?  I see by
the book that you are reading that you must be a good woman.  I know
you are a brave one by my reception.  May I confide in you a little?'

Agatha looked up sympathetically.

'We do know something about you,' she said; 'quite enough to make us
feel very sorry for you.'

Mr. Lester then told her again much of what she had already heard, with
additions, which drew out her sympathy still more for him.  He told her
that when he reached the farm where his son had been working, he found
he had left it, saying he was going to track out his cousin, and would
never come back till he had found him.

'My journey was fruitless, and then, after making many useless
inquiries, I fancied he might have returned home, as my last letter to
him had urged him to be home again without fail before this summer
would be over.  So I came back, and find from my agents in London that
he must be still abroad.  My journey out there was a failure; both lads
are swallowed up in the Australian bush, but I don't believe they are
dead, and I am convinced that Alick will never come back without
tidings of his cousin.  Their affection for each other was absurd,
preposterous, and utterly out of place.'

He paused, and Agatha asked anxiously:---

'Are you going back to Australia again?'

'I don't know.'

'Perhaps you wish to return here?'

'Not at all.  I never will, until things are on a different footing
between myself and my brother.  He has insulted me openly in this
neighbourhood; even daring to hint that I have plotted to get rid of
his son!  No, I came to get something I want out of my locked cupboard.
I conclude you will have no objection to my doing this?'

'Certainly not'; and Agatha rose and led him to the study.  She left
him there, but as she turned away she heard him quietly lock the door
behind her; and again she felt a nervous thrill run through her, as she
wondered if he were an impostor after all.

Half an hour later he came back to her in the drawing-room.

'I am going to do a foolish thing,' he said; 'I cannot tell what impels
me to do it, but the very thing I was going to take away I am
deliberately going to leave here with you.'

'I would rather you took it away, whatever it is,' Agatha said hastily.

'It will not be in your way.  I see you are careful tenants, and as
long as you keep my wishes respected about that locked cupboard, it
will be safe; far safer than if I carried it about with me, as I
thought of doing.  If you wish to correspond with me at any time, my
agents in London will forward anything to me.  I will give you their
card.  One thing I am going to leave with you, and this shows the
confidence I place in you.  It is the secret of opening that cupboard.
I have sealed the directions up in this envelope; and I want you to
give me your solemn promise that you will keep it as I give it to you,
in trust for my son.  When he returns, he will be sure to find his way
down here.  Be kind to him, and give him the envelope.  I have never
confided to him the secret of the cupboard, and I wish him to open it
as soon as he arrives.  It is most important he should.

'You may wonder at my trusting a comparative stranger with such a
charge, but I am a good reader of faces, and I do not think you will
fail me.  Promise me you will keep this envelope from the knowledge of
any one, even from your sisters; and promise me you will do what I
desire about it!'

But,' objected Agatha, 'we may not live here always.  If we leave
before your son returns----'

'My son is bound to come back before the end of this year, if he is
alive.'

'Then will he wish to come and live here?'

'No.  Neither my son nor I will ever live here again, I fancy.'

'Then where will you be when your son returns?'

'I do not know.  In my grave, perhaps.  I have told you my agents'
address.'

So, after a little hesitation and a great deal of wonder, Agatha gave
him her promise to act as he wished.  Seeing he looked tired and worn,
she asked him if he would have any refreshment, but he refused.

'You need not make my visit known throughout the neighbourhood,' he
said, standing up and buttoning up his coat; then glancing at her
Bible, which lay open on the table by her side, he added rather
sarcastically:

'If you want a Bible study, Miss Dane, discover the answer to a
proposition made in the Book of Jeremiah.  I believe it's in the first
verse of the twelfth chapter.  You see I know my Bible well.'

'And so do I,' said Agatha, smiling, 'though not so well as I ought.
And I can tell you that the same proposition troubled David; but he
solved it in the sanctuary.'

'Is that a hint to me?' said Mr. Lester, a little taken aback by her
quick reply.

'No; though don't you think it a pity to hold aloof from God's worship
on the day set apart for it?  Even the heathen are more respectful to
their false gods.'

'I did not expect to receive a sermon here,' he responded, with a
little dry smile.

'No, and I would not presume to give it,' said Agatha, smiling in her
turn.  'And don't be surprised that I knew your verse in Jeremiah so
well.  I came across it the other day, and thought it fitted in well
with a favourite Psalm of ours, the thirty-seventh.  We have had an
experience something like yours, and it would make one bitter
sometimes, if one did not remember that our circumstances are being
shaped by God Himself.'

Mr. Lester said nothing, but held out his hand, and Agatha took it,
feeling strangely drawn to him.  They shook hands, and then, as Mr.
Lester stepped out into the verandah, he turned.

'Remember your promise, and offer a prayer sometimes for a disappointed
old man who fears he won't live to see his hopes fulfilled.'

He disappeared in the fast-falling twilight, and Agatha sat in her
chair, gazing before her as if in a dream.  Her sisters found her
strangely preoccupied when they returned; but when they were enjoying a
cold supper together, and the maids were out of the room, she told them
of her strange visitor, begging them to say nothing of it to any one,
and purposely omitting to tell them of the envelope entrusted to her.

'Are you perfectly certain he was genuine?' said Gwen anxiously.  'It
was a very risky thing to let him have sole possession of the study!
Why did you not offer to stay in the room with him?'

'How could I?  He locked himself in!'

'Worse and worse!  He might have been taking impressions of the locks,
and will break into the house another night by the study window!'

Agatha shook her head with a confident smile.  'He was a gentleman, and
had a true face; I am not at all afraid of him.'

'It is quite an adventure,' said Clare, flushing up with excitement.
'Now, what do you think he wanted to get at in the cupboard?  Is it a
treasure store, or does it hide some ghastly secret?  I really think I
should have peeped through the key-hole, and seen how he opened it.  It
would have been such an opportunity.'

'Did you dismiss him with a tract?' asked Gwen mockingly.

'No, I had not one by me,' said Agatha simply.  'I feel very sorry for
him.  He is in great trouble about his son.'

'And you are sure he does not want to come back and turn us out?  It
would be very awkward if he did.'

'He seemed quite certain on that point.'

Gwen heaved a sigh of relief.  'I think I will tell you what I purpose
doing, she said rather solemnly; 'or shall I put it off till to-morrow?'

'"'Tis the Sabbath,"' quoted Elfie, mimicking old Deb Howitt's tones.

'If it is anything startling, I would rather you kept it till
to-morrow,' said Agatha; 'I have had quite enough to startle me
already.'

'Oh, very well,' responded Gwen unconcernedly; 'my news will keep.'

But she was disappointed that no one seemed curious enough to press her
for more information, and the next day, after working hard all the
morning in the garden, went off to see the Howitts in the afternoon.

Gwen had taken a real liking to the sisters, and would often drop in
upon Patty, and have a cup of tea with her when her sister was away.

It was a warm day, and she was glad to reach the cottage, with its
shady orchard round it, after the blazing meadows she had crossed.

Under an old apple-tree, on a low stool, she found Patty sitting,
knitting furiously away at a grey worsted stocking, and muttering to
herself as she did so.

'What is the matter?' Gwen asked gaily, as she took a seat on the grass
by her side; 'you look quite agitated!'

''Tis one of our bad days,' said Patty, looking up and shaking her head
dolefully.  ''Tis generally the wash-tub that does it, and Monday is
our washing day.  I did mean to be careful that my lips didn't offend,
but 'tis no good when she's of an argumentative turn!  Yes, miss, she's
locked me out, and I hope she's enjoyin' herself, for on Mondays I
always bakes a cake for tea.  Deb never did have a light hand for such
things, and she's a-messin' in there with my flour bin, and pilin' tons
of coal on the fire, for I've been watchin' the smoke, and I can tell,
and if I'm kept out here till dark, I'll maintain a promised wife comes
before a sister!'

'Is that the discussion?' asked Gwen, her eyes twinkling with amusement.

'Now let me put it to you, miss, and she'd no business to begin it over
the wash-tub, for it wants a cool head and a quiet mind to tackle such
things.  She was tellin' me of a case that was told her up at
Thornicroft Manor, which is three mile the other side of Brambleton;
and the housekeeper knew the parties concerned, being first cousin once
removed to the young man.  He was engaged to be married to an orphan
girl, a-tryin' to earn her livin' by dressmakin', but makin' a very
poor thing out of it.  And they had kept company for six years, and
then his mother died and left his only sister on his hands.  But mind
you, miss, they were a-goin' to be married, and had fixed the day
before his mother took ill, and then what does the young fellow do but
break it all off with his girl, sayin' he was only able to keep one
woman, and that would have to be his sister!  Now what do you think,
miss?  I say it was a cryin' shame of him, and Deb, she will have he
did right, for his sister was delicate, and flesh and blood come first,
she says.  We argued it up and down, and she cried him up, and I cried
him down, and we gets hotter and hotter.  We couldn't keep off it after
we left the wash-tubs and was a-havin' a bit of dinner; but I sticks to
it that a promised wife comes first, and then, with a shove, I found
myself out of doors, and the key locked behind me!'

Gwen laughed till the tears ran down her cheeks.  Old Patty's intense
interest in the unknown young couple, and her warm partisanship for the
little dressmaker, together with her tragic tone and injured demeanour,
were too much for her gravity.

'You are two foolish old women,' she said at last.  'I suppose it is
love of your own opinions, and not the fate of these strangers, that
makes you so combative.  Which of you has the stronger will?'

'Ay, we're wonderful alike in temper, more's the pity, but I consider
myself a fitter judge of right and wrong than Deb, who goes about and
hears so much that it's all hearin' and no meditatin', whiles I sit
here, and has the time and opportoonity to weigh the matters in and
out, without the clack of many tongues to confuse my brain and make me
say a man is a saint when he is a fool, not to say a sinner!'

Nothing that Gwen could say would calm the old woman, and when she went
up to the cottage door, Deb remained conveniently deaf to all her
knocks.  She came home, and gave a graphic description of the quarrel
to her sisters; but when their obstinacy was being condemned, Agatha
said in her quiet way:

'Well, Gwen, you ought to have sympathy with them, for if any one ever
goes against you, I am sure you feel as they do.'

'You mean I am fond of my own way and opinions, and won't bear
contradiction!  Oh, Agatha, how you love to preach to us all!  I won't
say you are mistaken, for I am not going to get up an argument, and I
want you all to be especially agreeable while I lay a plan of mine
before you.'

'Now for it,' murmured Clare; and both Agatha and Elfie leant back in
their chairs, the one in anxious, the other in amused anticipation of
what might follow.




CHAPTER IX

Gwen's Resolve

  'How little thou canst tell
  How much in thee is ill or well!
  Nor for thy neighbour, nor for thee,
  Be sure!'--_Clough._


Gwen cleared her throat.  She sat in a low wicker chair by the open
window of the drawing room, and for a minute her eye wandered out into
the back garden, which looked in perfect order, and hardly needed the
incessant hoeing and weeding of a lanky youth, who was now resting on
his hoe and leaning against the wall in a sleepy attitude.

'We have now been here three months, and after the satisfactory evening
we had with our accounts, Agatha, last week, we have come to the
conclusion that we can live here well within our income.  This being
the case, and all anxiety for the future----'

'You're talking like a book,' interrupted Elfie saucily; 'don't purse
up your mouth so, and look so superior, and like Cousin James.'

'Very well, then, I will come to the point at once.  I mean to go out
to California and pay Walter a visit, and I want to sail before the end
of this month.'

There was a dead silence.  Then Agatha said a little drily, 'And you
will want your 100 pounds to do that, of course?'

'No, I don't.'  Gwen's tone was a little sharp.  'I have some in hand
from my writing.  I can see from your faces that you don't approve, but
I've had it in my mind for a long time, only I have waited to see how
things would go.  Cousin Jacob's treachery was a bitter blow, as I was
afraid you would want me at home to look after you all----'

'We're not the poor fools you think us,' put in Clare indignantly.

Gwen went on as if she had not heard her: 'And now I have got the
garden into such excellent condition, and you are all shaking down and
finding friends and occupations for yourselves--Agatha, the vicar and
the villagers; Clare, her sweet Miss Villars; and Elfie, divided
between the church organ and her music at home--I shall not be needed
or missed.  I don't mean to be away for years, but I am sure from
Walter's letters that he is not doing as well as he should.  He wants
shaking up, perhaps starting in a new groove; and, honestly, I want to
see life in the Colonies.  It will do me good, and I hope I shall do
him good.  I may be back in six months' time.  That is my idea--to pay
him a visit, and then come back to you here.'

'I suppose we should all like to visit him,' said Clare crossly.  'Why
shouldn't one of us go, and you stay at home?  I am sure a winter here
will finish me.'

Walter seems such a stranger to us,' said Elfie, 'that I wonder if he
will like it.  He was always at a boarding-school, and we only saw him
for the holidays, and then he went abroad directly he left school.  I
hardly know anything about him.  Has he any idea you are going, Gwen?

'I will write by the next mail and tell him.  I know him a little
better than you do, Elfie, for you were but a child when he left
England.  He has often said how he would like one of us out there to
keep house for him.  Of course, he will be delighted.'

'I am sorry you want to go,' Agatha said slowly.

'Why?  Is there any good reason why I should stay at home?'

Agatha was silent, and though the younger girls plied Gwen with
innumerable questions, and were full of excitement about it, she said
nothing, and presently walked out of the room.

Gwen looked after her with a mixture of doubtful perplexity and
annoyance.  She and Agatha had always been much together, and she
valued her opinion, though determined not to be swayed by it.  She felt
this silence meant disapproval, and was by turns uneasy and indignant
at it.  It was not till after Clare and Elfie had retired to bed that
night that Agatha referred to the matter.  And Gwen little knew that
she had been kneeling at her bedside praying for guidance in offering
her advice, for more than an hour that evening.

'Well,' said Gwen, with a little laugh, as she reclined in her
favourite wicker chair, and looked up at her sister's grave face, as
she turned from her writing-table to speak, 'what does Madam Prudence
say to my scheme?'

'I think it is too important a step to take hastily,' said Agatha.

'My dear, I have been thinking of it for months; there has been no
haste in the matter.  Removal of objection number one!  Now for number
two!'

'I think,' said Agatha slowly, 'that you are quite as likely to
unsettle Walter as to settle him.  He is not doing very grandly, but he
keeps out of debt; and it seems to me that it is only by steady
perseverance that fortunes are made nowadays.  Then you may seriously
inconvenience him by giving him such short notice of your intentions.
A man living by himself on a small farm is not prepared to receive
ladies at a day's notice.  He may be away from home when you arrive.
Oh yes, I know you are not going to be influenced by what I say, but I
do ask you to look upon it as a serious matter.  And, Gwen, you know I
don't often "preach," as you term it, but I do wish you would practise
the verse old Nannie gave you just before we left London.  It is an
important step.  Do commit it unto the Lord.'

'I am not religious,' said Gwen, a little lightly.

'Do you never mean to be?'

'I don't know.  Every one has a different nature.  It is natural for
you to be good.  It is natural for you to trust and lean upon religion,
because you have such a humble opinion of your own judgment and powers.
Now I feel--I can't help feeling--a confidence in myself.  It may be
conceit, but it is natural for me to trust in my own judgment, and plan
my own course of life, and until disaster attends my attempts I shall
continue to act for myself.  Of this I am certain!'

'Ah, don't say that!' exclaimed Agatha; 'it would be sad if disaster
were to follow this step of yours.  I hoped, from your advocating a
country life, that you would be content to settle down here quietly.
If it is the dulness of the place that is driving you abroad, I am
sorry we ever came here.'

'I am never dull anywhere,' Gwen said quickly; 'I have too many
resources.  It is not that at all.  I have wanted to go out to Walter
for a long time, and now I have made enough money to do it, nothing
will stop me.'

'You are so sure of yourself,' said Agatha, sighing.

'Yes, and I am not ashamed of it.  We can't be all alike, and
self-confidence is a great blessing sometimes.  It saves one from an
infinite amount of care and worry.'

Agatha was silent.  As is often the case with sisters, there was great
reserve between them on matters that lay closely to their hearts, and
though Agatha longed to warn Gwen of her besetting fault, she hesitated.

Gwen continued with alacrity: 'I have made inquiries about steamers,
and hope to sail the week after next.  I have very little preparation
to make, for I am not given to much luggage.'

'And you mean to go out quite by yourself?'

'Why not?  In these days chaperons are unnecessary.  There are always
some nice people on board who befriend single women.  I am not a young
girl.'

'You are not very old,' said Agatha, scanning the bright, handsome face
with its wilful mouth and determined chin; 'and as I know vanity is not
a failing of yours, I may say that you are too good-looking to be going
about the world alone.'

Gwen laughed.  'Oh, you poor old thing!  Why will you try to mother us
all, when you cannot manage it!  You may be perfectly certain I can
take care of myself.  Now shall we go to bed, or have you any more
objections to make?'

'I wish you would pray over it,' were Agatha's parting words; and when
Gwen got to her room that night she pondered over them.

She was not actually irreligious.  She read her Bible occasionally, and
went through a form of prayer by her bedside every night; but religion
had never touched her heart.  It was but an empty name to her, and she
was too secure in her self-confidence and pride to ever feel her need
of anything outside herself.

She drew her Bible towards her now, and turned to the 37th Psalm.  She
first glanced at the verse Nannie gave her, then read the psalm through
carefully and steadily.

'It exactly describes Cousin James,' was her inward thought.  'I wish
we could always see the good righted in this life, and the wicked cut
off.  I am afraid I could not follow out these precepts in my life.  It
is all waiting and trusting and doing nothing oneself, but letting God
do it all for one.  It is a psalm that must bring wonderful comfort to
Agatha.  Of course, I shall be able to pray that my visit to Walter may
be for good, but I am sure it will.  It is not as if I am meditating
some very wrong course of action.  If they really wanted me here, I
would not think of leaving them.  I am going out for Walter's good.  Oh
dear! how often I wish I had been the man in our family!'

With such thoughts as these she presently bent her head, and asked a
blessing on her undertaking, and then turned into bed, feeling very
virtuous at having done so.

There was a great deal of talk between the sisters about Gwen's
proposal, but not one of them now thought to dissuade her, and the only
unpleasant criticism she had to bear was from Miss Miller.

Elfie and Gwen met her in the village, and she stopped them at once.

'What is this I hear?' she demanded, tapping Gwen on the shoulder with
her stick.  'Are you going off to find a husband abroad, because you
haven't been able to pick one up here?  I thought you young ladies
would be disappointed when you came to know our neighbourhood.'

'Our friends and acquaintances are not limited to this small corner,
Miss Miller,' retorted Gwen, holding her head proudly; 'we should be in
a poor plight if they were.  And if we felt dull, London is not out of
reach.  I am going out to my brother.'

'So I have been told.  You are going to live amongst bushrangers and
savages.  It shows a refined and modest taste to go where you will be
the only woman.  But I am surprised at nothing in these days, when
everything is topsy-turvy, and society at its worst.  Women vie with
one another in being conspicuous, and girls go about the world in men's
clothes!'

Elfie began to laugh, but Gwen said haughtily,--

'Since it does not surprise you, Miss Miller, I wonder you mention it
at all.'

'Husband-hunting!' growled Miss Miller; and she hurried past them
without another word.

'She is an impertinent woman!' said Gwen wrathfully.

'I think she is an old dear,' said Elfie merrily.  'You never hear
people speak out their thoughts as she does!  I always wonder what she
is going to say next.  The other day I was leaving a message for Agatha
at the vicarage, when she came out with Lady Buttonshaw, who had been
calling there.  She said good-bye to her, and then added with great
severity: "It is a good thing for you to be without your maid for a
little.  I shall not hurry Emma Gray to go to you.  A woman might as
well turn into a fashion-block as allow her maid to clothe and unclothe
her as your maid does you!  Bestir yourself, my dear.  Find out on
which side the buttons on your boots are, and how many hairpins are
necessary for the erection of your pretty hair!"  Lady Buttonshaw only
laughed as she walked away.  I suppose everybody knows that her bark is
worse than her bite!'

Gwen had a different criticism pronounced upon her departure by old Deb
and Patty.  She went to wish them good-bye, and their surprise was
great when she told them where she was going.

'Is it among the wild beasts and heathens?  Well, you're a brave young
lady to venture out all alone.  But I should be terribly afeared of
losin' my way.  Are there signposts all the way?'

'There, Patty, you ain't showin' off your knowledge to talk so!  Miss
Gwen will go all the way in a steamer, and her brother will be meetin'
her when she comes to land.  It's the steamers are so tryin' to flesh
and blood.  Mr. Giles told me all about it when he went to America with
his master.  You have to sleep on shelves up the wall, and there be no
washin' your clothes for the whole time you're on the sea, which to a
clean, decent body must be dreadful!  And the food is shaken out of you
as fast as you gets it down, and 'tis a marvel that a body gets to the
other side o' the world alive!'

'It's wonderful good of you, miss, to go to take care of your brother!'
said Patty, regarding Gwen with an awe-struck face; 'but you gentlefolk
seem to be hardier to such things than us should be.  And then you'll
be able to speak them foreign langwidges.  But it's to be hoped the
cannibals won't get hold on you.  I've only seen one person come back
from foreign parts alive, and that was Tom Clark, and he was a sailor.
But I reckon there are a few beside him that live to come back!'

'You'll not be marryin' an Indian prince out there, miss?' put in Deb
anxiously.

'Miss Gwen is a Christian,' Patty said solemnly.  'She wouldn't be
marryin' a heathen who keeps wives by the score, and eats them up by
turns!'

And Gwen laughingly assured them that she meant to return as she
went--a single woman.

The days slipped by; Gwen, with her usual energy and determination,
arranged for her journey in every detail, and when the time came, took
leave of her sisters with cheerful equanimity.

'It is not for very long,' she said; 'and if you want me back sooner,
you have only to wire and tell me so.  I shall be back, I hope, before
Christmas.'

But Christmas seemed to Agatha a long way off, and she perhaps of all
the sisters felt most depressed at Gwen's departure.




CHAPTER X

Clare's Discovery

  'A closed bud containeth
  Possibilities infinite and unknown.'


Life went on very quietly with the three who were left.  Elfie was the
sunshine of the house; her ringing laugh and little snatches of song,
as she came in and out, cheered all who heard her.  And Clare, fitful
and uncertain in her bright moods, could not understand Elfie's
unfailing good-humour.

'You never will take life seriously,' she said to her one morning after
breakfast, as they were waiting for the postman in the garden, and
Elfie had seated herself on the top bar of the gate, swinging herself
to and fro, and trilling out an old English ditty as she did so.

'I can't make cares when we have none,' she responded laughingly; 'I
have never been so happy in my life as I am now.'

'I wish I could be contented with so little.'

'Oh, you!  You're always straining after shadows, and won't live in the
present at all.  Now tell me, what have you to make you unhappy to-day?
You're expecting a letter from Hugh, and Miss Villars is coming to tea
with us this afternoon.  Those are two pleasures for you.  And then
look at our weather!  This is an ideal summer.

  "Strange that summer skies and sunshine
    Never seem one half so fair,
  As when winter's snowy pinions
    Shake the white down in the air."

Why don't you live in the present?'

'Don't preach,' said Clare carelessly; 'it's too warm this morning to
argue.  Here comes that lazy man at last!'

Elfie sprang down and seized the letters with a bright nod of welcome
to the stolid-looking postman.

'Here is one from Gwen!  Agatha will be pleased; and here is Hugh's!
Now, Clare, be happy!  And there is not one for me, so I shall go to
Agatha to hear how Gwen is getting on.'

She darted into the house, and Clare, sinking into a chair on the shady
verandah, prepared herself to enjoy one of Captain Knox's periodical
epistles.  They were always full of life and interest; and Clare was
beginning to feel a sick longing to have him back with her again.  Even
as she read she let the letter fall in her lap whilst she mused upon
the past.  'I used to be so cross to him.  I took all his love and
attention so coolly.  If I only had him back again, how different I
would be!  He was always so unselfish, and I was so selfish and
discontented.  I can't think now how I could have been unhappy when I
was constantly seeing him.  Oh, Hugh! if you could come to me now, I
would never grumble again!  One touch, one word, one look, if only I
could have it!'

And Clare's blue eyes filled with tears, and her sight was dim as she
finished reading her letter.  She remained motionless for some minutes
then, and was rising slowly from her seat to go and hear the news of
Gwen, when a slip of paper fluttered out of the envelope.  It was a
postscript as follows:--

'Here is Mr. Lester's motto on the carved scroll.  It was in Arabic, as
I thought, and the translation is something like this:--

  'A closed bud containeth
  Possibilities infinite and unknown.'


Clare folded it up with a sigh.

'There is no clue there, that I can see.  I will have another look at
the cupboard this afternoon.'

She joined her sisters, and heard a racy account of Gwen's experiences
on board ship.  She had fallen in with nice people--a Mr. and Mrs.
Montmorency, going out to California for the third time to look after
some property of theirs.

'We are great friends,' Gwen wrote.  'Mr. Montmorency is a clever,
well-read man--can talk on any subject, and has been in California for
nearly thirty years.  His advice would be invaluable to Walter.  I am
asking them to come and pay us a visit when they are in our
neighbourhood, which they hope to be before long, and they have
promised to do so.  Mr. Montmorency does not think farming pays in
Walter's locality.  He says there are many things more profitable; but
I will not tell you all our talk.  I spend most of my time with them.
You may be interested in hearing that Clement Arkwright is on board.
But I give him a wide berth.  He asked some rather impertinent
questions the first time we spoke to each other.  I showed him it would
not answer, and now we pass each other with a bow!'

'Who is Clement Arkwright?' asked Elfie.

Clare laughed.

'One of Gwen's old admirers.  He has too much of her self-will and
dogged pride to pull with her.  Do you remember, Agatha, how we used to
enjoy their wordy combats?  I always thought that at the bottom of all
her antagonism to him she really liked him; but she never would allow
it.'

'I dare say he wonders at her going out alone,' said Agatha musingly;
'she does not say where he is going.  I remember he had a great idea of
shielding women from the brunt of life, as he used to call it, and that
was one thing that Gwen could not stand.'

'What more does she say?' asked Clare.

'Not much.  She says she means to study farming while she is away, and
hopes to get valuable hints from Mr. Montmorency, who seems to be a
perfect mine of information.'

'One of Gwen's sudden friendships!' observed Clare.  'I only hope it
will last out the voyage!'

She left the room and went to the study, where she spent the rest of
the morning in trying to copy Mr. Lester's carving on the cupboard.
She was very fond of this occupation, and had decorated several little
tables and stools.  She found Mr. Lester's handiwork a great help to
her, and was ambitious of designing a cupboard herself, very much after
the pattern of the study one.

As she was tracing a part of the delicate border edging the panels, she
suddenly started, and the thought flashed across her:--

'It must be one of these buds that contains the secret of the lock or
spring, and that is the meaning of the words:--

  '"A closed bud containeth
  Possibilities infinite and unknown."'


She passed her fingers over some thick buds that hung in festoons along
the border, and then with finger and thumb she tried to move each one
in succession.  At last one began to revolve; she turned it
breathlessly, and after three or four revolutions, a sharp click, and
then the panel opened.

For one minute Clare stayed her hand--irresolute.  She had discovered
the secret, and the contents of the cupboard would be before her eyes.

Surprise, delight, and a little dismay were mingled in the discovery.
Stories that Jane had told her of the mysterious cupboard that some
thought contained proofs of a crime, came to her mind.  The remembrance
of the owner's express wish that it should remain locked, made her
hesitate.

It was a battle between intense curiosity and the sense of honour; but
the latter prevailed.  Clare closed the panel hastily, turned round the
carved bud till it was closed, and then walked to the window, turning
her back on her temptation.

She heaved a sigh of relief.

'I am sure I deserve praise for such virtue.  No one can taunt me with
a woman's curiosity after this!  Now the question is, shall I tell the
others?  I don't think I will.  It wouldn't do to let the maids get
wind of it.  I shall write and tell Hugh, of course.  How interested he
will be!  It was really rather clever of me to find it out, for it is a
wonderfully ingenious device.  And I suppose the old man never dreamt
of women deciphering his Arabic characters, much less following the
ambiguous hint given in his motto.'

And then sitting down at the writing-table, Clare commenced a letter at
once to Captain Knox.  Her discovery delighted her, and for the rest of
the day she was sunshine itself.

Miss Villars arrived in the afternoon, bringing with her two shy, lanky
girls of fourteen and fifteen.

'I knew you would let me bring two of my visitors,' she said aside to
Agatha; 'they are recovering from influenza.  Their father is a curate
in Liverpool, and I am trying to feed them up, and get a little colour
in their cheeks before they go home again.  They are rather shy, but it
is such a pleasure for them to be in the country.'

Elfie soon took possession of the girls, and wandered round the garden
with them, where their tongues unloosed, and they poured forth such a
flood of chatter that she had no difficulty in entertaining them.

'We are having such a lovely time.  Miss Villars' house is like one you
read of in books.  We never thought we should ever stay in one like it.
We feel as if we are in fairyland.  You see, we are very poor, and only
keep one servant, and there are seven of us at home, and our house is
in a terrace, and smuts, and soot, and dust fly in at the windows all
day long.  Miss Villars is awfully nice, and she makes us enjoy
ourselves.  At home one feels quite wicked if one reads a storybook,
because there are so many of the boys' stockings to be mended, and
cooking, and our own lessons in between, for we go to a day school for
three hours every morning.  Now here, Miss Villars takes us out in the
garden after breakfast under her shady trees, and puts one of us in a
hammock, and the other in an easy chair, and leaves us there with some
delicious books for a couple of hours.  And then we see a dainty lunch
coming out to us about eleven o'clock, and we drive and play tennis,
and she treats us just like she might her own sisters!'

Elfie, looking at the radiant faces and sparkling eyes of the two
delicate girls, envied Miss Villars the privilege of being able to
bring such brightness and happiness into others' lives.

Meanwhile Clare was having a private talk with her friend, for after
tea Agatha had sped down to the village on one of her benevolent
errands.

'Have you found the true secret of happiness yet?' asked Miss Villars
presently.  'You look brighter than when I last saw you.'

'I may be brighter now, but I shall have one of my black moods again
soon.  No, Miss Villars, I don't think I shall ever be satisfied in
this life.  The more I have, the more I want, and you couldn't expect
me to be happy with Hugh in Africa!'

She laughed as she spoke, but her smile soon died away.

'I want him back dreadfully, Miss Villars.  I never dreamt I would miss
him so much; and I have a horrible feeling that he will not come back
at all.  I think I should die if he did not!  I long sometimes to go
out to him.  But I can't.  I must just wait, and I hate waiting!  I
never could wait for anything when I was a child, and it drives me
nearly wild!'

Clare spoke with such vehemence and passion that for a moment Miss
Villars thought it best not to speak.  Then she said slowly,--

'Poor child! you take life's lessons hardly.  And I can't help you
except by sympathy.  There is only One who can, and you will not go to
Him for the patience and rest of soul you need.'

Tears filled Clare's blue eyes.  She gazed away out of the window up to
the sweet summer sky, and her face grew wistful and sad.

'I am seeking Him,' she said in a low voice, 'but it all seems dark,
and the Bible seems no help, and prayer a weariness; and then I give up
trying, and try to amuse myself, and make the time pass as best I can.'

Then Miss Villars did a thing which Clare owned to herself that no one
else but Miss Villars could have done naturally.  She took hold of
Clare's hand, and with closed eyes and bent head began to pray.

A very short and simple prayer, but a strange thrill ran through Clare
as she realized this was indeed speaking to One who was close to them.
And nothing jarred her feelings.  She only seemed to be drawn into the
very presence of her Saviour, who with open arms was waiting to receive
and bless her.

When Miss Villars ceased speaking, Clare's head still remained lowered,
and there was perfect silence.  It was broken by Elfie's return from
the garden with the girls; and without a word Clare crept softly away
up to her own room, and Miss Villars left without seeing her again.

But up in her room Clare was kneeling by her bedside in a passion of
tears.

'O God, help me, help me!  I want to be right with Thee, I want this
rest of soul; give it to me.  Oh, if Thou art waiting to bless, I am
ready, I am willing.  Forgive me and save me for Christ's sake.  Amen.'

She had never prayed so earnestly before.




CHAPTER XI

Agatha's Legacy

  One by one, bright gifts from Heaven,
    Joys are sent thee here below;
  Take them readily when given,
    Ready, too, to let them go.'--_Adelaide Procter._


'Why, Agatha, what is the matter?  You look quite scared!  No bad news
by the post, is it?'

Elfie asked the question one morning as she came into the dining-room
to breakfast, and found Agatha staring out of the window with troubled
eyes, and letting the brass kettle boil over on the white tablecloth
with the greatest indifference.

She turned round and faced Elfie with pale cheeks.

'Mr. Lester is dead.  It seems so sudden.  He caught cold and died on
the voyage out to Australia.  And his lawyer writes to tell me about
it.'

Elfie looked startled.

'Must we turn out of the house?'

'That is the strange part of it.  The lawyer says he had a visit from
Mr. Lester before he went, in which he informed him he was going to
leave this house to me unconditionally, and a codicil has been added to
his will to that effect.'

'Why, Agatha, I can hardly believe it!  He must have fallen in love
with you on the spot.  Whatever induced him to think of such a thing?'

'I am sure I don't know, unless he was afraid of his cupboard.  When I
say he leaves the house to us unconditionally, that is the only
condition he makes, that we live in the house and keep that cupboard
locked till his son returns, and then let him have the contents.  He
told the lawyer he had left it to me as a trust, and he knew I was a
woman of honour, so he would have no anxiety about it.  And in return
for this he bequeaths to us the house for good and all.  I wonder what
his son will say to it, if he ever does come back!  I hardly know what
to do about it.  It seems so very extraordinary!'

But, extraordinary as it was, Agatha found on further correspondence
that it was a fact.  The house was legally bequeathed to her; and,
after the first excitement of it was over, she thanked God with all her
heart that she had now a certain dwelling.  She had a great dislike to
change, and was so wedded to the country round her, and had made so
many friends amongst the poor, that it had been a secret dread for a
long time that the owner would return, and they would have to move.
She was telling Elfie something of the relief it was to her, when the
latter remarked,--

'Ah, well, Agatha, Nannie's text for you is true: "Trust in the Lord,
and do good; so shalt thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shalt be
fed!"  You are provided for, at any rate.'

'And don't you find your verse true, too?' asked Agatha quietly.

Elfie coloured a little, then laughed.

'Yes, I do; but life is so pleasant that I have had nothing to put my
happiness to the test.'

'And I hope it never need be,' was Agatha's response.

Not long after this Agatha was surprised by a visitor one afternoon,
and this was no other than Major Lester.

He bowed stiffly to her when she entered the room.

'I have heard from my lawyer that the strange report flying about this
neighbourhood is true,' he began abruptly.  'You will excuse my coming
to you to make a few inquiries, but had you any acquaintance with my
poor brother before you came here?'

'None whatever,' was Agatha's prompt reply.

'Then he is a perfect stranger to you?'

Agatha hesitated; then she said slowly,--

'I do not suppose it will matter now my mentioning it, but Mr. Lester
came here about a month ago.'

Major Lester looked astonished.

'I was unaware that my brother had been in England at all since his
visit abroad; but he always was most erratic.  And may I ask why his
visit was to be kept a mystery?'

'I don't think there was any mystery about it.  He simply asked me not
to mention it.'

'Did he leave no message for me?  May I ask his errand?'

'He left no message.'

Agatha was dignity itself.  She was going to reveal nothing more, and
Major Lester saw as much, and resented it accordingly.

'Well, I see you and my brother came to some understanding together;
and, I suppose, this freak of his is the result.'

Then, pulling himself up, as he felt his temper was getting the better
of him, he added, more blandly, 'Pray do not think I object to you as
permanent neighbours.  If I had any ladies in my household, they would
have called on you before this.  I came to you this morning because
there is a locked cupboard of my brother's, which, as his nearest
relative, I presume I have a right to open.  I believe there are family
papers in it of great importance.  Perhaps you will kindly allow me to
go into the study at once, as I am rather pressed for time.'

'I am sorry to have to refuse you, Major Lester, but I promised your
brother that that cupboard should remain closed till his son came to
open it.'

Major Lester glared at her, but Agatha maintained her quiet composure.

'He must have been as mad as a hatter!' he muttered; then turned
angrily to her.

'And may I ask when my nephew is to be back, as you seem fully
conversant with the affairs of our family?'

'I do not know.  Your brother thought he would return this year.  Have
you heard anything of your son?'

'My son has met his death by the hands of my nephew, at the instigation
of his father!  I warn you, Miss Dane, you may suffer the penalty of
the law by refusing to let me have access to that cupboard.  It is a
mere question of time.  If my nephew does not return soon, I shall
insist upon having it opened, and I shall bring a lawyer with me to
enforce my authority!  I will not detain you longer now.
Good-morning!'  And Major Lester took his leave literally trembling
with passion; so Agatha told her sisters afterwards.

'It is very unpleasant for us,' she added; 'I feel quite anxious lest
Major Lester should insist upon having his way.'

'Have you nothing in writing from Mr. Lester himself about it?' asked
Clare; 'I thought the lawyer sent you a written statement by him.'

'Yes, I have that; and, after all, the house is mine, and I suppose
that includes the cupboard.'

'Of course it does.  What did Mr. Lester say about the cupboard?'

'That it was not to be opened till his son came; and in this paper he
bequeaths to me a certain portfolio of his that is in it.  He says I
can make what use I like of the contents.  But of course I shall not
get that till his son appears.'

'It is very romantic altogether,' said Clare; then, trying to speak
indifferently, she added: 'Does Major Lester know how to open the
cupboard, Agatha?  I fancy it is not a very easy task.'

'I don't know,' said Agatha; 'perhaps he does not.  In that case it is
safe.'

And she thought with satisfaction of her sealed envelope safe at the
bottom of her dressing-case.  'Well,' she added, after a pause, 'I am
not going to worry over it.  One must just do what is right, and leave
the result.'

'But,' said Clare dreamily, 'supposing there is a hidden crime in that
cupboard--papers that tell of the whereabouts of Major Lester's
son--should we be right in keeping it hidden?  Supposing I were to find
a way to open that cupboard, Agatha, should I be wrong in doing it?'

Agatha looked startled.

'What do you mean?  Are you trying to open it, Clare?  I should hope
you would not be so dishonourable.  It is given as a charge to us.  In
fact, it is the condition of our keeping this house.  And do you think
anything would make it right for us to betray such a trust?  I know an
honest, upright man when I see him, and Mr. Lester was that, whatever
Major Lester may be!'

Clare laughed a little confusedly.

'You are getting quite excited.  I never said I intended opening it.  I
wish this wandering son would come back.  Couldn't we advertise for
him?'

Their conversation was here interrupted by another visitor, and this
was Miss Miller.

She came hurriedly and breathlessly in, pulling out the bows of her
bonnet-strings, which was a way of hers when excited.

'Miss Dane, what is the meaning of this?  No; I cannot stay to sit
down.  I'm off to a committee meeting in Brambleton, for the "Friendly
Girls."  The pony cart is waiting at the top of the lane.  I have just
met Major Lester.  He is terribly put out by his visit here.  Would not
tell me particulars, but said you were siding with his nephew, who was
hiding from the hands of justice, and refused him admittance into his
brother's study.  You are new-comers, my dear, and this will not do.
How did you get acquainted with Mr. Lester?  The major says he has been
paying you secret visits.  Very improper--single young women cannot be
too careful.  Why have you been keeping it a mystery?  And what is it
all about?  And what is the secret of this mysterious cupboard?'

'That I cannot tell you, Miss Miller,' said Agatha, answering only the
last of her questions; 'for I do not know it myself.'

'But you know something!  We are not accustomed to mysteries here, and
the major is an upright man, and a regular churchgoer, and his brother
was a ne'er-do-well, But we won't say anything against him now, poor
man!  Only I assure you, you will make yourselves the talk of the
neighbourhood if you three unmarried women scrape acquaintance with his
son, and espouse his cause with such hot vehemence!'

'Miss Miller,' said Clare, with burning cheeks, 'you have no business
to say such things of us; we have given you no cause to do so!'

Miss Miller just nodded her head up and down excitedly.

'I say just what I like, my dear, and no one is to dictate to me as to
my manner of speech, least of all a young chit of a girl who knows
nothing of life!'

Then Elfie came to the rescue, whilst Clare flounced out of the room in
great indignation.

'Don't be cross with us, Miss Miller,' she said, in her pretty coaxing
way.  'Major Lester left us when very angry, and you mustn't believe
all he said about us.'

But Miss Miller would not be appeased, and she left very soon,
declaring that it was all very 'strange indeed, and most mysterious,'
and that 'people who could not be straightforward, and made their own
plans without reference to their spiritual guide, were a great trial to
have in the neighbourhood!'

'It really seems,' said Agatha, with a weary sigh, 'that Mr. Lester's
legacy will prove anything but a blessing!  I do wish people would
leave us alone.'  But a short time afterwards Major Lester's wrath and
Miss Miller's strong partisanship in his cause were quite eclipsed by a
greater trouble.

Agatha took in _The Times_, and it was generally delivered at their
house about twelve o'clock in the morning, by the postmistress's little
boy, directly he came home from school.

One morning Clare met him at the gate, and opened it herself.  She was
feeling anxious and uneasy.  For the first time Captain Knox had missed
the mail, and she was full of gloomy forebodings.

Agatha was tying up some straggling rose branches in the verandah, and
Elfie practising away in the drawing-room.

'Any news, Clare?' Agatha asked carelessly.

There was no answer.  She looked up.  Clare slowly came towards her,
paper in hand.  She was in a fresh white dress, with a bunch of crimson
roses in her belt, her golden hair shining in the sun, but her face was
as white as her dress itself, and she stared at Agatha as if she did
not see her.  Agatha dropped her hammer and nails with a crash to the
ground.

'What is it, Clare? anything about Gwen?' she asked, in frightened
tones.

Clare handed her the paper without a word, and still gazed before her,
as if she were in a dream.

Agatha soon found it.  Only a terse, short telegram, mentioning that
reports of a massacre of a surveying party had just reached the African
coast, and it was feared that none had escaped alive.

Captain Knox's name was amongst those of the party.

'It is only a report,' faltered Agatha.

'I know it is true,' said Clare steadily; and then she passed Agatha
by, and went up to her room.

She locked her door, and seated herself in an easy chair by her window
with the calmness of despair.

'He is dead, he is murdered, and he will never come back!  I shall
never see him again, and my life is at an end with his!'

These thoughts burnt themselves into her brain.

She leant out of her window, and gazed over the sunny meadows, noticing
the smoke appearing from Patty's chimney, and a flock of swallows
flying through it.  Then she watched the motions of a frisky colt in
the next field, and wondered if life seemed one long bright holiday to
him.

And then crushing her roses up in one hand, she flung them out of the
window.

'What are roses and sunshine to me now?' she thought passionately, her
whole soul swelling in protest at the black cloud enveloping her.
'What a bitter mockery this peaceful scenery is, when one remembers the
awful fate that has fallen on Hugh and me!'

And then bending her head in her arms, she laid them on the low
window-sill, and sobs began to come that shook her from head to foot.
Dry, tearless sobs they were at first, and she got up and paced her
room in hot rebellion.

'It is cruel--cruel of God!  He does not care!  He might have let me
have him back, when I was trying to be a true Christian!  Such an awful
death!  Oh, Hugh, Hugh! my heart is broken!'

She seized hold of a cabinet photo that stood on her dressing-table.
It was Captain Knox in his regimentals; and as his frank, fearless gaze
met hers, the flood of her tears was loosed, and they came thick and
fast, relieving her brain, but exhausting all her strength by their
vehemence.  Luncheon time came, but no one could get her out of her
room, and Agatha wisely let her alone.  At five o'clock she tried her
door again, and this time Clare unlocked it, and met her on the
threshold with tumbled hair, flushed face, and defiant eyes.

'What do you want?  Can't you leave me alone?'

'Oh, Clare darling, how I wish I could comfort you!  You will be ill if
you don't take any food.  Will you not have a cup of tea?'

Agatha's eyes were red with crying, and her lips quivered as she spoke.
She laid her hand gently on Clare's arm, but it was shaken off, and
Clare turned her back upon her and walked to the window.

Then she burst forth passionately.

'I am not surprised!  I knew when he went he would never come back
again.  I believe it is this house that is a curse to us!  I always
felt from the first night we entered it that it would bring us trouble;
and why I am to be the victim I don't know!  I hate and loathe it!
Leave me alone.  You needn't be afraid of my starving myself.  I wish I
could; but I have got to live, and I shall have to drag through it as
best I can.  There is no chance of my dying of a broken heart.  People
never do.  I shall outlive you all, I expect.  What are you waiting
for?  Do you want me to come downstairs?'

'No, I have some tea for you here.'

And Agatha disappeared, to bring in a dainty little meal on a tray.

As she put it down she said slowly: 'I wonder if you know where to take
your trouble, Clare?  God Himself will comfort you, if you let Him.'

'You needn't waste your breath in uttering platitudes, Agatha.  I know
that is the correct thing to say, but it doesn't do me an atom of
good.'  And Agatha left her with a sigh, and went to her own room to
pray for her, and to ask that her trouble should soften, and not
harden, her heart against the only Comforter.




CHAPTER XII

Out in California

  'A woman will, or won't, depend on't;
  If she will do't, she will, and there's an end on't.'


On the wooden verandah of Walter Dane's ranch in Southern California
sat Gwen one evening, enjoying the orange-flamed sunset in front of
her.  And lounging opposite her, smoking his pipe, was Walter--a
good-looking young fellow, whose usual expression was supreme
good-humour, but whose brow now was furrowed with anxious thought.

'You see, Gwen,' he said, knocking the ashes out of his pipe, and
ramming in a fresh supply of tobacco in a slow, meditative fashion, 'it
has been very good of you to come out and look me up.  I've been
longing for a sight of my own flesh and blood for years, and if I was
only a sight better off, I'd offer you a home for good.'

'That I would not take, with many thanks,' said Gwen, laughing.  'Now
come, ever since I arrived I have seen you have had something on your
mind, so unburden!  What is it?'

Walter looked across the great sweep of uncultivated ground outside his
ranch to the landmark of another ranch in the distance--a windmill
which pumped up the water necessary for use from a great depth below.

'You saw the Setons yesterday.  What did you think of them?'

As he asked the question he pulled at his heavy moustache rather
nervously.

'I thought they were wonderfully nice people for colonials.  The girl
is a pretty little thing.'

'They are not colonials,' her brother returned quickly; 'at least, not
more than I am: for they haven't been in this country as long.  Meta
only came out a couple of years ago.  She was educated at home in
Brighton.'

'Was she?'

Gwen was looking at her brother with keen eyes now.  There was silence
for a minute, then Walter said in a very quiet voice,--

'We have been engaged, she and I, for a twelvemonth, and the wedding is
fixed some time next month.'

Another dead silence, then Gwen said, with a little laugh, 'Well, I am
surprised.  I did not think you were a marrying man.  You never gave us
a hint of this in your letters home.'

'No; for I foresaw a long engagement, and thought it might be deemed
rash.'

'And how do you intend to support a wife?'

'I can manage it now.  My ground is improving.  The great difficulty in
this part of the country is want of water, and I have overcome that.
Of course, it will be hard work for some time yet, but Meta knows what
the life will be like, and an aunt in England has lately died, and left
her a legacy.  She does not come to me portionless!'

Gwen gazed in front of her with compressed lips.  She would not show
her consternation and discomfiture to her brother, though to herself
she was saying, 'I made a mistake in coming out to him!'

Aloud she said,--

'Well, I suppose I must congratulate you.  And I will not stay out here
after your marriage; you will have one of your family at the ceremony,
which ought to comfort you.'

'You will like her as a sister, will you not?' asked Walter, with
anxiety in his eyes, as he turned and faced his sister.

'Oh yes.  I thought she was a nice little thing.  Not much character, I
suppose; but you men prefer that style of woman.  She struck me as a
lady.'

'Rather!'  And with a short laugh Walter put his beloved pipe in his
mouth, and with a sigh of relief at getting through his news, sank into
a lounge chair, prepared to give his full confidence to his sister, now
that the worst was over.

But Gwen disappointed him by rising carelessly from her seat.

'I am very tired.  Your early hours here make the day interminable.
Good-night.'

She passed into the house humming the air of a song, but once in her
room her expression changed.

'He will marry and have a large family, and only just make his farming
pay to support them all.  He has no ambition, no desire to make his
fortune and come back to England.  It means a thorough colonial life
for always.  Oh, what fools men are!'

She paced her room with clenched hands.

'I never dreamt of such a thing.  I came out here to shake him up, to
make him better himself.  And I find he is perfectly content, and
considers my coming a decided nuisance, though he doesn't like to say
so.  He can barely afford to live comfortably himself, and yet he
meditates a speedy marriage.  I should like to postpone it.  I suppose
if I asked him to let me stay out here for three or four months and let
his marriage wait till after I left him, he might agree, but then what
should I gain by that?  I want him to give up this farming, which will
never make his fortune; but if he has a wife in view he will cling to
it!  How I wish he had heard Mr. Montmorency talk of the certainty of
finding fresh goldfields, if only men of push and a certain amount of
money could be forthcoming!  I will not let my journey out here be all
in vain!  Walter must be roused, and made to do something better with
his life than his present existence.  I wish Mr. Montmorency would pay
us a visit soon.  He would advise him for his good.  He says this
country is teeming with riches under the surface, only colonists are
often content with so little that they do not develop half the
resources so close to them.  After all, it won't hurt that girl to wait
another year longer.  She looks a simple, stupid little thing; and if
Walter can be got to postpone his marriage, we may be able to do
something with him yet.'

As Gwen thus cogitated, the scene in the cottage garden at home came
before her, when she found Patty Howitt locked out by her irate sister,
and her words flashed across her with clear distinctness now,--

'If I'm kept out here till dark, I'll maintain a promised wife comes
before a sister!'

A shadow crossed Gwen's determined face at this recollection.

'It is not a case of me or the promised wife,' she muttered to herself
with a little laugh.  'I would willingly go home again at once and
leave the young couple to themselves, but it is of their future that I
am thinking; and they will thank me in the end for it, I know.'

Not a doubt crossed her mind of the wisdom or expediency of trying to
upset her brother's plans and purposes.  She knew what influence she
possessed over him.  His was a placid, rather weak nature, true and
steadfast in his dealings with others, and quite capable of holding his
own as long as he kept in a certain groove; but for a man he was
strangely uncertain and distrustful of himself, and one who always
found it easier to take advice than to give it.

Gwen had a restless night.  Her head was full of plans, and when the
next morning there was a stir outside the house, and she was told that
a 'strange gentleman and lady' had arrived, she was quite enough versed
in colonial ways to show no surprise when she went out upon the
verandah and greeted 'Mr. and Mrs. Montmorency.'

Walter was a capital host, and was genuinely pleased to see any friends
of his sister.  And Gwen felt that fortune had indeed favoured her, and
sent to her aid the very one who could help best at this crisis.

Mr. Montmorency inspired most people with confidence, and it was not
long before he was deep in discussions of the country with Walter,
telling him many valuable facts about agriculture that had come under
his own observation, and from that drifting on to talk of the mineral
wealth that had as yet hardly been touched.

He remembered the gold rush in Northern California, and prophesied the
same would take place in the part they were in.  Walter listened, but
said little, and even when Mr. Montmorency went on to unfold a scheme
of his shortly to be put into project, he showed little interest.

'It is very well for men of means to venture on such undertakings.  It
wants capital, and there are few about here who would risk their
hardly-earned savings on a speculation which might fail.'

Then Gwen, with her clear head and quick brain, took the matter up.
Even bright little Mrs. Montmorency could talk well on the subject, and
for the next few days little else was mentioned but a certain region a
few hundreds of miles away, where Mr. Montmorency intended to begin
operations, and where he had already found proof enough of the
existence of gold to make it worth his while to start a company and set
to work in earnest.

The next mail that left for England contained the following letter from
Gwen to Agatha;--


'DEAREST AGATHA,--

'This is purely a business letter, and a very important one.  I have
told you all about Walter and his surroundings already, so will not go
into that again.  Mr. Montmorency has been staying with us.  He is a
clever, able man, very well connected, a nephew of Lord D----, and has
spent most of his life out here.  He is starting a company for working
a gold-mine in this neighbourhood.  There is a certain prospect of its
being a grand success.  I send you a bundle of prospectuses and papers,
which I want you to look carefully through.  I know how cautious you
are where investments are concerned, and, of course, one cannot be too
careful.  You will see the directors are all wealthy men, and their
names well known at home.  Show the papers to old Mr. Watkins if you
like, and if you're afraid of acting without legal advice.  Now I come
to the point.  Mr. Montmorency has taken a great liking to Walter.  He
says he is too good to rust in this part as he is doing, and waste the
best years of his life in slaving to earn a livelihood, with no
prospect of anything better in years to come.  And he has asked him to
join him in his undertaking, and become an active partner in the
concern.  I won't waste time by going into it all, but it is a grand
chance for Walter, and he is certain to make his fortune.  The one
condition is that he must have capital to invest.  He is going to sell
his farm, but that will not bring in much.  What I propose is that we
four should invest our capital in this.  Hand it over to Walter, and
then Mr. Montmorency will be able to take him into the concern.  We
shall not lose, but be gainers by this.  Mr. Montmorency can assure us
5 per cent. interest from the first, and that is more than we are
getting now.  There is not the slightest risk or speculation in the
matter, and Walter is fortunate to have found such a friend in Mr.
Montmorency.  I have already promised my portion.  Talk it over with
Clare and Elfie, and show them that it will not only be benefiting
themselves, but will be the making of Walter.

'I must tell you that he is engaged to be married to a very nice girl
out here, and she is going to invest a legacy of hers in the same
company.  Every one round here has the greatest confidence in Mr.
Montmorency.  He is still staying with us, and Walter quite enjoys his
society.  If you want any more information about the company, you can
get it by applying at their office in London.  I do hope, for Walter's
sake, that you will not be long in making up your minds.  It seems so
wonderfully fortunate that I should have come out in the same steamer
with the Montmorencys.  The mail is going.  I must stop.  If Walter
gets the capital he needs, he will go off with Mr. Montmorency to the
centre of operations next month, and I shall then return home.  I may
tell you that he was thinking of getting married shortly, but he and
Meta Seton have wisely settled to postpone it until he has a good
income.  I believe myself that he will soon be a rich man.  If he is, I
shall be well repaid for my journey out here.  Love to all.  Will write
again soon.

'Your affectionate sister,
  'GWEN.'




CHAPTER XIII

His Last Message

  I hold it true whate'er befall,
    I feel it when I sorrow most:
    ''Tis better to have loved and lost
  Than never to have loved at all.'--_Tennyson._


This letter reached Agatha soon after the sad news had come to Clare of
Captain Knox's death.  At first his relatives hoped there might be some
mistake, but when further details came to hand, they corroborated the
first tidings received, and some weeks after his baggage was sent home,
and as much information was given to his sorrowing relatives as could
be gleaned from the one or two survivors of the fated party.

His mother wrote kindly to Clare, and gave her as much information as
she had herself received, but that was not much.  The little party had
been surprised one day when out surveying, and were shot down one after
the other by an unfriendly tribe who surrounded them.  Two escaped to
tell the tale, but when a punitive force was sent out at once, there
were no signs of the fray.  The enemy had carried off the bodies of
their victims, and escaped beyond the reach of justice.

For days Clare was almost beside herself with grief, and in despair
Agatha sent over for Miss Villars.

'She is so fond of you, that you may be able to comfort her as we
cannot,' said Agatha, when Miss Villars promptly arrived on the scene.
Miss Villars shook her head sadly.

'No human comfort is of much use in a case like this,' she said; but
she went upstairs, and remained two hours with Clare, and when she left
Clare begged her to come to her again.

'You do me good.  You make me think there is a God, after all.  I have
been doubting everything.  I feel it is a judgment on all my discontent
and bad temper.  I often used to tire of him, and wish he were
different; and now I feel it would be heaven itself to see him standing
before me as he used to do!'

To her sisters Clare preserved a stolid, impassive demeanour.  She
would not leave the house for three weeks after the tidings had come,
and then unfortunately meeting Miss Miller, she was subjected to
questionable sympathy.

'Very glad to see you out, my dear.  Why haven't you been to church
lately?  It's a very bad sign to keep away from the means of grace when
in trouble.  Have you heard the particulars of Captain Knox's death?  I
hope you are quite certain about it, you seem to have gone into
mourning very quickly.  In cases like this there are often mistakes
made.  Was the body identified?  Well--well, I am very sorry for you;
but you would have felt it more if you had been his wife!'

Clare turned and fled from her, and stayed away from church for a month
longer, then only going at Agatha's most earnest request.

When Gwen's letter was received, and Clare heard the contents, she said
listlessly,--

'Walter can have my money if he likes; it will make no difference to
me.  You can write to Mr. Watkins, and get him to see to it, Agatha.'

'And mine, too,' put in Elfie brightly.  'Gwen has a good head for
business, and if she is going to venture hers, I am sure we can ours.'

But cautious Agatha shook her head, and spread the papers out before
her with a grave and anxious face.  Then she disappeared for a short
time.  She knelt at her bedside and asked for guidance about such an
important step.  And when she rose from her knees she thought sadly
that Gwen had planned and purposed without prayer, and wondered if she
were too intent upon her own schemes to be wise in her judgment and
decisions.

'I am going up to town to talk it over with Mr. Watkins,' she
announced, a short time afterwards.  'I do not wish to be ill-natured,
and selfish, and prevent Walter from getting on, but I have a horror of
these gold-mining companies; and if it should come to a crash, we
should literally have nothing left.  Of course, you must do as you
please, only don't act hastily.  Let me hear what Mr. Watkins says.'

So to town she went, and came back very tired, but quite decided in her
own mind.  Mr. Watkins had not scoffed at the company.  He had heard a
good deal about it, and had clients who were taking shares in it.  He
thought it might prove a very good speculation, and there were sound
business men backing it up.  'But,' said Agatha, 'he said most
emphatically that it was a speculation, and that no one could be
positively certain of its success; and, after a great deal of
consideration, I have made up my mind to have nothing to do with it.'

'Did Mr. Watkins advise your not having anything to do with it?' asked
Elfie.

'No; he was quite neutral.  He would not commit himself either way.'

The result was that Clare and Elfie transferred their capital to Mr.
Montmorency's company, trusting entirely to the assurances of the
prospectuses that their dividends would be paid within the first
twelvemonth.

And Agatha had the unpleasant task of writing her refusal to Walter,
who had written by the same mail as Gwen, painting his future in
glowing colours, and loud in praise of Mr. Montmorency.

'Clare,' said Elfie one afternoon, coming into the study, where Clare
was reading in a dreary manner, 'come and see Deb and Patty with me,
will you?  Agatha wants some honey, and we haven't seen anything of
them for ages!'

Clare put down her poetry-book with a sigh, but said she would go, and
they were soon sauntering over the meadows to Beehive Cottage, as it
was called by the villagers.

They found both sisters at home, and Deb was busy remaking two merino
skirts for herself and Patty.

''Tis not very often I do dressmakin' at home, but we're gettin' rather
shabby, and so I'm turnin' our Sunday bests.  Sit down, young ladies,
and Patty will get you a glass o' milk.'

'And how is your sister gettin' on over the sea?' asked Patty, when she
had brought the milk and taken a seat opposite her visitors.  'Deb and
me often wonders of her, and how she be likin' it.'

'Oh, she is all right--very busy, making us send our money out to
invest in a gold-mine.'

'To buy a gold-mine!' ejaculated Deb.

'No; to put our money in it.'

'Ay; why the need for buryin' it down so deep?  The earth is
everywhere; it be a safe bank, 'tis true, but safer close to one, than
in furrin parts, it seems to me.'

Patty spoke emphatically in her breathless manner; and Elfie laughed
outright.

'No, she doesn't want us to bury it.  We have taken shares in a company
that is working the gold-mine.'

Deb and Patty shook their heads doubtfully over this statement.

'The company pickin' up gold is generally a low, bad set,' said Deb.
'I heard tell at Squire Johnson's of a young gentleman who was nigh
murdered by a rascally set of men, and all because of gold in his
pocket.  Gold ofttimes brings a curse, my dears; 'tis best to spend as
you goes.  And if so be as you put a little by for your burial, well,
the earth won't tell tales, and a flower will mark the spot.  Did I
ever tell you o' my great-gran'mother's money pot?'

'No,' said Clare, with interest, for any old tale delighted her; 'tell
it to us now.'

'Great-gran'mother were livin' alone, and gran'mother, she were married
four mile off, and used to come in on market days, and see the old
lady.  Great-gran'mother, she were rather snappy and short, and one day
she says to gran'mother, "Sally, my girl, when you come to want, pull
up a yaller marigold by the roots"; and gran'mother, she laughs, and
says she, "What old wife talk be that, mother?  Do marigolds bring
luck?"  Great-gran'mother, she died soon after, and gran'mother were
sore disappointed not to find a few shillin's tied up in a stockin'.
The cottage were sold, but gran'father bought it hisself, and moved
into it with his family; and years passed, and then gran'father, he
died of a fever, and gran'mother brought up eleven boys and girls wi'
credit.  But times got bad, and she were left wi' a cripple daughter,
and the t'others scattered away from her, and work failed her, and they
were close on comin' to the House.  Gran'mother, she had selled most on
her furniture, and there were at last but a crust o' bread in the
place, and she were makin' tea-kettle broth--for she were Devonshire,
and they folk is great at that--when all on a sudden, as she were
a-sayin', "Now, Alice, this be our last meal in this dear place," the
words of great-gran'mother come surgin' and rushin' through her brain.
"Sally, my girl, when you come to want, pull up a yaller marigold by
the roots!" and with a hop and a skip, though she were turned
seventy-five, she goes straight down the garden, and tugs at a fine
yaller marigold.  It took a power o' strength to pull it up; and there
to the bottom o' the roots was a pot.  She pulled of it up, and it were
full o' silver and gold, and kept her and her daughter in ease for ever
after.'

'Till they went to the grave,' put in Patty solemnly.

'And do you bury your savings?' asked Elfie, laughing.

Deb looked at Patty, and Patty looked at Deb with grave consideration.
Then Deb spoke:

'There is things we can't just confide to every one, young ladies.
Will you be havin' a taste of Patty's hot cake before you leave?  It's
just time for it to be comin' out of the oven!'

Patty bustled forward to procure it.  Nothing pleased the old women
more than to show hospitality to any visitors who came to see them.

While the cake was being got ready, Clare went out to look at the
beehives with Deb.

They chatted over them for a few minutes, and then Deb put her hand
gently on Clare's arm.

'We've heard o' your sad loss, my dear, and our old hearts have ached
for you.  'Tis a heavy cross to have the hope of bein' a happy wife
snatched away, and a lone and loveless spinster's lot instead
stretchin' out in front o' you.  'Tis a long and weary road for young
feet to travel!'

Poor Clare burst into tears.  She could not bear, as yet, to be
reminded of her trouble.

'Don't talk of it, Deb,' she said between her sobs; 'it only makes it
worse.'

'Ay, ay,' said the old woman, wiping a sympathetic tear away from her
own eye with the corner of her apron; 'ye'll be feelin' it sore for a
time.  But the good Lord will comfort you, if no one else will.'

'It is so dreadful to have to live, whether you like it or not,' said
Clare, in that little burst of confidence she sometimes showed to
strangers, though never to her sisters.

'But seems as if it would not be easier to die if one left the work
that has been set us to others to finish,' said Deb gravely.

'I have no work at all,' Clare responded quickly, almost passionately.
'I could have been a good wife--I hope I could--but there's nothing
left me now; no one wants me, and there's nothing to do, and I'm sick
of everybody and everything!'

'I'm no preacher,' said Deb meditatively, 'and I don't live a saintly
life, so it's no good my settin' myself above my fellows, but Patty and
me has our Bibles out once every weekday, and most of all Sundays we're
readin' it, so I'll make so bold as to pass you a verse that I did a
powerful lot of thinkin' over last Sunday.  'Tis this, and maybe, with
your quick, eddicated brain, you'll take it in quicker nor I
did--"Strengthened with all might, according to His glorious power,
unto all patience and longsuffering, with joyfulness."  Maybe that's
your work just at present, my dear.  Shall we go in now?'

Clare's eyes shone through her tears.  Slowly and dimly she was seeing
light through her darkness.  Miss Villars had done much to help her.
But nothing seemed to have shown her the grandeur of suffering as this
one verse, uttered in slow, halting accents by an uncultured woman.
She never forgot it.  The verse--God's message to her--was then and
there engraved upon her heart; and though she had not yet found her
'rightful resting-place,' though she was still alternately halting and
groping her way towards the Light, yet the possibilities of a noble
life, a life in the midst of crushing sorrow, such as represented by
Deb's text, had a wonderful attraction for her.  She was very silent
all the way home that afternoon, and shut herself into the study for
some hours' more reading; but this time her poems were laid aside, and
the Bible had taken their place.  It was only a day or two after that
she had a great joy.

She received a little parcel from Mrs. Knox, containing a small
Testament, a gift of her own to her lover, and inside a letter
addressed to her in his handwriting.  It had been written just before
that fatal day when he had sallied forth so unthinkingly to his death.


'MY DARLING,--

'Just a line to-night, for I may not have much time to write again
before the mail.  We are off into the bush tomorrow on one of our
business expeditions.  How I have longed lately for our work to be
done, and the steamer to be bringing me back to you!  I have been
having grave talks lately with one of our fellows who is a religious
chap.  It has brought vividly before me your sweet gravity in the
quaint old study that last night we spent together just before I left,
when you told me that you thought we both might have more comfort if we
had more religion.  Do you remember?  What will you say when I tell you
that I have found out that you are right?  I cannot express myself,
darling, as I should wish, but I can tell you that your little
Testament is my best friend.  I have discovered that religion is
something more than a head belief.  And here, in the stillness of my
tent, I confess----'


This was all.  He had evidently broken off hurriedly, and the letter
had found its way to Clare to give her its unfinished message of hope.
She bowed her head over it in the silence of her room, and then down on
her knees she dropped in a burst of thankfulness for the mercy and
tenderness shown her in letting her receive such a message.  All
rebellion and mistrust faded away, and in true humility and penitence
Clare was enabled to take the final step towards the realization of
that peace she had longed for all her life--that peace that only comes
to a soul that has truly sought and found its Saviour.




CHAPTER XIV

The Cousins' Return

  ''Tis sweet to hear the watch-dog's honest bark
    Bay deep-mouthed welcome as we draw near home;
  'Tis sweet to know there is an eye will mark
    Our coming, and look brighter when we come.'--_Byron._


'Agatha!  Clare!  I have had an adventure!  Where are you?  Oh, here
you are; now listen!'

Elfie ran breathlessly into the house one afternoon in great
excitement.  She had been for a walk, and had come in late for tea.
Agatha was writing letters at her davenport in the drawing-room, and
Clare was still toying with her cup of tea.  A book was in her lap, but
her thoughts were far away.  Her face still wore its sad and somewhat
wistful look; yet there was gradually dawning upon it the sense of
repose and rest.  Her sisters noted the old fretfulness and
restlessness had gone out of her tones, and whilst Elfie wondered,
Agatha rejoiced that trouble had not hardened or embittered her.

Elfie threw herself into a seat, looking the picture of health and
fresh young beauty.

'I have been to the pine woods,' she began eagerly, 'and I was
rejoicing in my solitude, and walking along through the very darkest
part, when I heard voices coming towards me.  I wondered if it would
turn out to be Major Lester and any of his friends, for I knew he had a
private gate into the wood from his grounds.  So, not wanting to meet
any one, I turned down a side path, and then if you please came plump
against the very man I wanted to avoid--Major Lester himself.  He quite
started when he saw me, but took off his hat and tried to be civil.
You know I have been introduced to him at the Millers'.  I apologised
if I were trespassing, and then he said with a little bow, "I do not
wish to keep my neighbours at a distance, Miss Dane; you are welcome to
use any foot-path through my woods.  I have no secrets on my property,
I am thankful to say!"  I thought that rather nasty of him, for I knew
he meant our cupboard, but I murmured something polite, and was just
going to turn back, when the voices I had heard came nearer, and
suddenly two strange young men came down the path in front of us.  You
should have seen Major Lester's face; he stared as if he couldn't
believe his eyes, and his hand resting on his stick trembled as if he
had the palsy.  Then he made a step forward,--

"Roger, my boy, is it you, or do my eyes play me false?"

'Before I could get away, one young man said in a most emphatic voice,
and rather sternly too, I thought, "I have brought him back to you,
uncle, and he will tell you for himself whether my poor father or I had
any hand in his disappearance!"  Then I made my escape; I heard them
all talking at once.  Isn't it exciting?  The lost ones have come back.
I think they had walked from Brambleton station--taken the short cut
through the woods.  They looked as if they had roughed it.  So
weather-beaten and worn!'

'This is an excitement,' Agatha said, turning round from her writing;
'what is Alick Lester like, Elfie?'

'Oh, I didn't notice, I hadn't time.  They were both tall,
broad-shouldered men in rough shooting clothes, I think.  Do you think
they will be paying us a visit, Agatha?'

'I suppose Mr. Alick Lester will,' and Agatha's face assumed rather an
anxious expression, as she remembered her charge.

'Where is he going to live, I wonder?' said Clare; 'it may seem to him
that we are usurpers.  Do you think he knows about his father's legacy
to you, Agatha?'

Agatha shook her head doubtfully.

'I don't know.  I suppose his lawyer will have told him, if he has been
to see him.  I expect he will stay up at the Hall.  Major Lester would
be hard-hearted indeed if he did not make him welcome after finding his
long-lost son!'

The next morning the whole village was in excitement with the news.
Miss Miller tore here and there, pulling at her bonnet strings, and
quite incoherent in her speech.

'The vicar is asking Alick to put up with us,' she said, meeting Agatha
out.  'It is very trying for him, poor fellow, to find both his father
and home taken from him, and it's not to be expected that he would stay
long at the Hall, and if his father hadn't died, you wouldn't be where
you are, and I suppose we did misunderstand him; but if he had come to
church regularly he would have found us his friends, and what he will
do now I can't think!  I can't stop a minute; I must see Major Lester
before our quarterly meeting about church expenses, which takes place
this afternoon at two o'clock; and I have just remembered that the
bed-hangings of the spare room bed are at the laundry, and if Alick is
to sleep there to night I must superintend the cleaning of the room
myself!'

Agatha smiled as she returned home, and wondered if there was anything
in the vicarage or parish that Miss Miller did not superintend.

Early in the afternoon Clare, who was doing a little gardening, was
startled by the sudden appearance of Agatha in the greatest distress of
mind, and quite shaken out of her usual composure.

'Oh, Clare, whatever shall I do?  I have lost a most important little
packet, and I am dreadfully afraid it has been stolen from me.'

'What packet?'

'A small packet Mr. Lester gave to me.  I did not say anything about
it, because he did not wish me to.  I put it in my dressing-case, which
always stands on my dressing-table, and I placed it in the secret
drawer.  The drawer is empty, and the paper gone.  I was to give it to
his son when he returned, and I promised to keep it safely.  I cannot
imagine what can have become of it!  What shall I do?  I wonder how any
one could have found it.  It is a perfect mystery to me!'

'You must have forgotten where you put it,' said Clare; 'let me come
and look.  It is quite impossible for any one to have stolen it.'

But Clare's search was quite as unsuccessful as Agatha's, and the
latter became almost tearful in her agitation and distress.

'Mr. Alick Lester will be sure to call, and it was his father's wish he
should open the cupboard.  How can he do it, when I have lost the
directions?'

'Is that all the packet contained?' asked Clare, looking relieved.  'I
had no idea you possessed the key to it!  How quiet you have kept it!
And now I will surprise you by telling you that I have found out myself
the way to open that cupboard, so am quite independent of any written
instructions!'

Agatha certainly was surprised, and though thankful when Clare related
her experience to her, did not feel more at ease.

'I have been careless of my charge,' she said.  'What will Mr. Alick
think of me?  And it is alarming to think that some one has got
possession of the secret.  They may have opened the cupboard already,
for all I know, or may be going to do it this very night.  I wonder if
our maids are to be trusted!  Perhaps Jane has been tampering with my
case.'

'I am sure she wouldn't.  You don't walk in your sleep, do you?'

Agatha gave a little laugh.

'No, you know I do not.  I remember looking at it only a week ago, and
putting it carefully back again.'

'Was any one in the room when you did it?'

'No--at least Jane came in, I remember, for she startled me, but she
would never know what it was.'

There was silence; then Agatha said more slowly, 'It does look rather
suspicious, now I have remembered about Jane, because she has been such
friends lately with Major Lester's valet.  You know she always walks
home from church with him.  Elfie was laughing about it, and saying she
had soon picked up a follower.'

'I don't see the connection between those two threads,' said Clare,
'unless you think Major Lester is a thief himself!'

'I don't know what I think,' said Agatha hopelessly, sitting down on a
chair, and looking the picture of woe; 'I only know I have lost what I
promised to keep safely, and I know that Major Lester's great desire
has been to get at that cupboard.  We won't say anything about it to
the maids, Clare, but I will write a little note to Mr. Alick, asking
him to come and see me the first thing to-morrow morning.  I will tell
him exactly what has happened, and then with your help he can open the
cupboard, and we shall no longer have the responsibility of it.'

With this wise decision Agatha brightened up, and Clare, who loved
nothing better than a mystery, grew quite animated in discussing the
matter, and offering her advice.  Elfie was taken into counsel, and the
three resolved to say nothing till they laid the facts before Alick
Lester.

One of the maids was despatched with a note to the Hall, and Agatha
received a polite reply from the young man, saying that he hoped to
call on her about eleven o'clock the next morning.

But Agatha could get no sleep that night; she was anxious and ill at
ease, and after tossing about in bed, long after the rest of the
household were deep in sleep, she rose to pace her room, as she
sometimes did when wakeful.

Her lips were moving in prayer, and she was endeavouring, as was her
custom, to commit her trouble to One above, when she was distinctly
conscious of stealthy footsteps treading the gravel path below her
window.  It was a bright moonlight night, and she had no light burning.
For one moment she hesitated; then quietly she walked to the window,
which was partly open, and cautiously moving the blind looked out.

The shadow of a man turning the corner of the house towards the study
window met her gaze, and Agatha realized that the time had come for
immediate action.  She was naturally a brave woman; yet for an instant,
when she remembered they were but a houseful of women, her courage
faltered.  Only for an instant.  Her motto, 'Trust in the Lord,'
flashed like a light across her path, and throwing on her dressing
gown, she left her room with quiet, steady steps.  She roused Clare,
who slept in the next room, and who, full of nerves and fancies as she
was, delighted in any nocturnal adventure.

'We really ought to have revolvers,' she said, as she rapidly prepared
to follow Agatha downstairs.  'What have you got in your hand?  A
poker?'

'Don't make a noise; I think we shall frighten any one away without
rousing the whole house.'

Clare valiantly seized both poker and tongs in her room, and crept
downstairs.  Agatha led the way, a candle in hand.  They reached the
study, and Agatha threw open the door.  To her horror the French window
was wide open, and a man was on his knees by the cupboard, a lantern on
the ground.  He started to his feet; then, bewildered and utterly
unprepared for their sudden intrusion, dashed out on the verandah and
disappeared, but not before both Agatha and Clare had plainly
recognised him.  He was Major Lester's valet!

[Illustration: AND SAW A MAN ON HIS KNEES BY THE CUPBOARD]

Agatha hastily closed the window and shutters, then looked at Clare,
who was now white and trembling.

'This looks bad, Clare,' she said gravely.  'This window and shutters
must have been purposely left unfastened.  He could never have
unfastened them from outside.'

But now the danger was over Clare's courage had vanished.  She grasped
hold of Agatha's arm.

'Come upstairs, quick!  He may come back and murder us!  I won't stay
downstairs another minute.'

'There is nothing to fear now.  He has gone.  I don't think he would
dare face us after being recognised.  Wait a minute.  Look!  He has
left an envelope lying by his lantern, and I believe--yes, it is mine.
And in Mr. Lester's handwriting.  Jane must be at the bottom of this!'

'Come upstairs.  I won't stay down here a minute longer!'

And Clare fled trembling to her room.  Agatha did not go up till she
had made sure the windows and shutters were securely fastened, and had
also been the round of the house.  Then she went to Clare, who was in
such a panic of fright that she persuaded her to come and share her
bed; and after she had grown calmer and finally dropped asleep, Agatha
lay quiet and sleepless, revolving the events of the night, and praying
for wisdom in dealing with the suspected Jane.

The next morning, immediately after breakfast, she called her into her
room, and the very sight of her white trembling face proved her guilt.
By dint of cross questioning, and much entreaty, Agatha was at last
possessed of all information.

Watson, Major Lester's valet, was a devoted admirer of Jane.  Together
they often talked over their respective master and mistress, and Watson
had told her of Major Lester's unsatisfactory interview with Agatha.

'It's some family papers that is locked up in that there cupboard he is
wild to get at, and he says he has a right to 'em; and so he has, for
he told a gentleman who was visitin' him that they would do him a
mischief if they got into wrong hands.  And it seems that Mr. Tom told
Miss Dane all about 'em, and gave her the secret of opening that
cupboard.'

From this statement Watson went on to work upon Jane's love of
discovering a mystery and her insatiable curiosity; and at last led her
to thoroughly search Agatha's room for any papers bearing on the
subject.  Quite by accident she came upon the secret drawer in the
dressing-case.  The fastening had become insecure, and, trembling at
her audacity, Jane carried the packet to her lover, begging him to
return it to her when he had possessed himself of its secret.  The next
move was to get her to leave the study windows unfastened, and here
Jane's fortitude gave way.

'I know it was wicked, ma'am, but Watson, he told me it couldn't do you
a injury; he wasn't a housebreaker, he wouldn't lay his finger on any
property of yours! he only wanted to get his master what rightfully
belonged to him.  Major Lester, he would handsomely reward him for it,
and so I did as he told me, but I never slept a wink all last night,
and when I heard you go downstairs, I could have screamed out "Murder!"
I was that scared.'

Then Jane begged and prayed with heartfelt sobs for forgiveness, and
Agatha, feeling a pity for her, told her she would not dismiss her
without a character, as at first she had determined to do, but would
let her stay on for the month, at the end of which time she must go, as
she could never keep a maid who had proved so utterly untrustworthy.

Coming downstairs from this interview with a worn face and anxious
heart, Agatha was met by Elfie.

'Mr. Lester has come, Agatha.  I met him in the garden, and he is in
the drawing-room waiting for you.'




CHAPTER XV

Alick Lester

He was a man of honour, of noble and generous nature.'--_Longfellow._


Mr. Alick Lester proved to be a pleasant, frank young fellow, with the
sunniest eyes and smile that Agatha had ever seen.  She took to him at
once, and found herself telling him without any hesitation the history
of the lost packet.  He listened attentively, but was indignant when
Agatha hinted that Watson might have acted under the major's
instructions.

'No, Miss Dane, my uncle is a gentleman.  He would never stoop so low
as that.  I know he tried to blacken my dear father's character, but he
idolized his son, and hardly realized the mischief he was doing.
Watson is a thorough scoundrel!  I have always known it, and my uncle
has already dismissed him for tampering with some of his letters.  He
was telling us about it last night, and Watson leaves him at the end of
this week.  Depend upon it, the chap was trying to get the papers in
his own hands for ends of his own, and I think you were awfully plucky
to catch him at it as you did.  But now we must get hold of him at
once, and get the packet from him.'

'I expect he will have left the neighbourhood,' said Agatha.  'If you
wish to open the cupboard, my sister will tell you the secret.  She has
accidentally discovered it.  Shall we go to the study now?'

The young man agreed at once to this proposal, and when Clare came
forward, he looked at her with secret laughter in his eyes.

'They say a woman never rests content under a mystery,' he said; 'and
you have proved my good angel, so I can only avow my gratitude.  But do
you know that from a boy I have viewed that cupboard as impenetrable as
the sphinx itself?  And yet my energy or ambition to solve its secret
was never sufficient to allow me to succeed.  My father always told me
that age had some advantages, and that when the time came for me to
know all that he did, I should do so.'

Clare flushed and felt very uncomfortable; then she met the young man's
gaze calmly.

'I know I have shown the weakness of our sex, but it is not often one
is brought into contact with such a mystery; and having had your
father's Arabic motto translated to me, I could not resist the
temptation of trying to prove its truth.  I need not say I have not
opened the cupboard.  That temptation I was enabled to resist.'

'And the motto?' inquired the young man, passing his hand almost
tenderly over his father's handiwork, and a shade coming over his brow
as he spoke.

Clare's face was sad too, as she remembered from whom the translation
had come, but she repeated quietly,--

  '"A closed bud containeth
  Possibilities infinite and unknown."'

Then, stooping down, she turned the carved bud, until a sharp click was
heard, and the door moved forwards; and then linking her arm in that of
Agatha the sisters left the room, and Alick Lester was alone with the
secret solved at last.

Two or three hours passed, and still he was shut in the study.  When he
at last appeared in the drawing-room, he seemed to have left his youth
and brightness behind him there.  He asked with knitted brow and
anxious face if he might speak to Agatha alone, and then drawing a
dusty leather portfolio from under his arm he held it out to her,
saying, 'I received a letter written by my father shortly before his
death, and which he had left in the charge of our lawyer.  He told me
to give this to you.  I fancy it may not prove so valuable to you as my
dear father hoped.  It is merely a collection of notes of his, and a
few valuable papers about some Assyrian and Egyptian antiquities.  He
always hoped to write a book upon the subject, but put off doing so
until he could obtain more information on certain points, or links,
that were missing.'

Agatha took her legacy very calmly.

'I daresay my sister Gwen, who is now abroad, will be interested in it.
She is very fond of antiquities of all sorts.'

Then looking at the young fellow's dazed, troubled face, she said
sympathetically, 'I am afraid you have spent a sad morning in looking
over your father's belongings.'

He laughed a little shortly.

'I have had a shock, and feel bewildered.  I have not the faintest idea
how to act, and it is at present all dark to me.  Miss Dane, you are a
good woman, my father says.  Will you pray that I may have right
guidance about a very difficult matter?  And may I come and see you
again?  I shall be staying at the Crown Hotel in Brambleton for the
present.  The Millers wanted me to go to them, but I cannot.  If I
stayed in this village at all, it would have to be at the Hall, and
they--I do not want that.'

'I hope you do not look upon us as usurpers,' said Agatha.  'I cannot
tell you how guilty I feel sometimes about accepting this house from
your father, especially since your return.  It seems as if you ought to
be here.'

Then Alick Lester looked up with his sunny smile.

'Miss Dane, I assure you I would never live here!  My future is to be
spent either out in the colonies or--or in a different house to this.
And I cannot tell you what a cheery, home-like aspect you have given to
this old house.  I am sure you are a boon to the neighbourhood, and I
should like, if you don't think it forward of me upon so short an
acquaintance, to look upon you all as friends.'

He grasped her hand warmly and departed; and from that time forward he
was on a friendly and familiar footing with the inmates of his old home.

Watson was found to have already left the neighbourhood, as Agatha
surmised, and no one was able to trace his movements.  Not wishing to
create disturbance in the village, Agatha did not mention his nocturnal
visit to any one, and Alick was the only one who knew of it besides
themselves.  Elfie and Clare were both rather disappointed that the
mystery of the cupboard seemed to be such a common-place affair, but
they noticed that it had brought a great deal of anxious thought to
Alick Lester.  His face was almost careworn at times, and he seemed now
to spend most of his time in London, occasionally coming to have a
further rummage in the cupboard.

'It is crammed full of old letters and papers,' he said once to Agatha;
'and if you will let me look through them on the spot, it will be such
a help to me.'

One day he brought in Roger Lester, and introduced him; and after that
the two young fellows often dropped in to afternoon tea, assuring
Agatha that they never felt so much at home anywhere else.  They both
had a fund of high spirits, and though Alick at times looked absorbed
and pre-occupied in anxious thought, he knew how to throw it aside and
be as light-hearted as his cousin.

They were sitting one afternoon on the verandah outside the
drawing-room, when Roger turned to Agatha and remarked,--

'You would not imagine it, Miss Dane, but we two have grown up with
such perfect _cameraderie_ that until quite lately, I believe, we have
never concealed a single thing from each other.  And now if you hear of
us drifting apart, and our liking turning to hate, you will know the
cause--it is the renowned old carved cupboard.'

Alick had been talking and laughing with Elfie, but he stopped
instantly as if he had been shot when he heard this speech, and there
was an awkward silence for a minute.

Roger added with a laugh, 'It is some skeleton he has unearthed; but
why he should refuse to let me share in the secret I can't imagine!'

'I don't think we need make it a matter of public talk,' said Alick
hotly.

His cousin looked at him in astonishment, then changed the subject with
a shrug of his shoulders and a laugh.

When they were gone Clare said thoughtfully, 'There is a mystery after
all, and not a very pleasant one, apparently.  I feel sorry for Mr.
Alick.'

'Which do you like the best of the cousins?' asked Elfie carelessly.

Clare's face looked sad as she replied, 'Oh, I don't know.  I don't
think any young man is worth a thought.  They amuse one by their fun,
but I would just as soon not have them come here so often.  Miss Miller
will be attacking us soon on the subject.  She was beginning this
morning, when I met her out, but I always flee from her when she is in
her aggressive moods.'

'What did she say?'

Clare looked at her younger sister with a little smile.

'Perhaps I had better not tell you.  She saw you cut a rose off the
other afternoon and offer it to Mr. Alick, and she considers that the
depth of iniquity.  "Such a piece of audacious flirting I have rarely
seen carried on within a few yards from an open road in full view of
any passer-by!"  And then she turned the tables on me, and I came off,
because she was making me boil with indignation.  I think she delights
in making her fellow-creatures as uncomfortable as possible.'

'It is only her way,' put in Agatha; 'she does not realize what a sting
her words have.  She told me last Sunday, when I unfortunately gave an
order to some of my Sunday class in front of her, that however much I
might try to slight her and usurp her place in the vicarage and parish
I would not be successful, for the vicar was proof against all young
ladies' blandishments!'

'She ought to be horsewhipped!' cried Elfie hotly, and then she began
to laugh.

'There is one that is a match for her in the parish, and that is Deb
Howitt.  She was covering a chair at the vicarage, and Miss Miller was
abusing some of the congregation--I forget who it was now.  It was
about the behaviour of some girls--I think she is always specially hard
on them--and Deb looked at her very quietly.  "Ay, ma'am, we mustn't
grudge them their sweethearts!  'Tis better for most to have the cares
of a family to soften them, for 'tis the spinsters that have the name
for getting hard and bitter.  Sharp tongues are not so frequent amongst
mothers, and the world would be better without bitterness, I reckon!"
Miss Miller shut up at once.'

'Deb asked me yesterday when Gwen was coming back.  What do you think,
Agatha?' said Clare.

'I don't know at all.  You know what her last letter said.  That Walter
had sold his farm and gone off with Mr. Montmorency, and she was
staying with Mrs. Montmorency in Loreto.  She did not seem in a hurry
to leave, and as long as she is happy we must be content that she
should be out there.'

And the autumn came and went, and winter set in without any word or
sign from Gwen of home-coming.

Alick and Roger spent the autumn in Scotland, but Christmas found them
both at the Hall.  Major Lester seemed to have overcome his dislike to
his nephew, and the Hall was quite a cheerful centre in the village.
Visitors came and went, and Agatha and her sisters were asked up there
more frequently than they cared to go.

Agatha still possessed Alick's confidence.  He would come to her for
advice, as most people did, but yet would never touch upon his serious
difficulty; and she sometimes wondered if the cupboard's secret was no
longer a trouble to him.

'Do you think I am leading a lazy life?' he asked her one day, when he
met her walking out and insisted upon accompanying her home.

'I think you are.  It is always a pity when young men have enough
income to live independently without any responsibility attaching to
their wealth.'

'I am not wealthy,' he responded quickly.  'I have just enough to live
upon.  What do you think of Roger?  He is as idle as I at present.'

'I think not.  He helps his father with the property, which is a large
one, and if anything happened to Major Lester he would have his hands
full.'

Alick laughed a little hardly.

'Lucky fellow!  So if I were in his shoes you would not find fault with
me!'

'I think,' said Agatha gently, 'that each one of us ought to realize
that we are not placed in this world to live for ourselves.  There is
so much to do for others who need our help.  You are young now, and
have life stretching out in front of you.  Do not waste it, do not have
to acknowledge when your life is over that no one will have been the
better for your existence.'

'Would you have one sink one's own individuality in the lives of
others, like some of our great philanthropists?'

'No, our first duty is to ourselves.  I think too many in the present
day rush into work of all sorts, trying to please and satisfy others at
the expense of their own peace and satisfaction, and that is wrong.'

'I don't understand you.'

'I mean this.  We have two lives: the outer one which every one sees,
and the inner one which only God and ourselves know about.  Our inner
life is the more important one of the two, is it not?  For it is the
spiritual part of us that is immortal.  First let us satisfy and ensure
the safety of our own souls, before we seek to satisfy the hungry and
thirsty ones around us.  And then if our inner life is adjusted
rightly--is in touch (shall I say?) with its Maker--the helping others
becomes a pleasure as well as a necessity.'

Alick did not reply, and Agatha delicately turned the subject; but her
words made him ponder much afterwards, and had far more effect upon him
than ever she imagined.




CHAPTER XVI

Bringing Bad Tidings

'A man should never be ashamed to own he has been in the wrong, which
is but saying, in other words, that he is wiser to-day than he was
yesterday.'--_Pope._


It was towards the end of February that old Nannie sat by her fire in
the peaceful almshouse in which she had taken shelter.  Rain was
falling fast, and when she heard a knock at her door, she hardly turned
in her chair, for she thought it could be only one of her neighbours
come for a chat.

When the new-comer came silently forward and stood in front of her,
Nannie looked up with a gasp and a cry.

'Miss Gwen!  My dear Miss Gwen, is it you?  Where do you come from?
And oh, how ill you look!'

Gwen bent over the old woman and kissed her; then she took a seat by
her and gave a hard little laugh.

'Oh no, I am not ill.  I wish I could be--at least, I am almost coward
enough to wish it.  I only landed early this morning in the London
Docks.  I have come from California, Nannie.  Aren't you glad to see
me?'

Gwen was clad in a plain dark blue serge and sailor hat, but somehow
had not her habitual neat appearance.  Her face was wan and white, she
seemed to have aged ten years, and her once sparkling eyes were now dim
and worn-looking.

'Just off a voyage,' murmured Nannie, putting on her spectacles and
peering anxiously into her face.  'Ay, my dear, surely them foreign
parts don't bring such change and misery to all the folks who venture
out?'

Gwen laughed again.

'Every one, I hope, has not had my experience,' she said.  'If I may
quote from your favourite book, Nannie, I can say truly, "I went out
full, and have been brought home again empty!"'

'"The Lord hath brought me home again empty,"' corrected Nannie.

Then Gwen leant forward, and taking Nannie's two hands in hers, she
said in a hard, strained voice:

'Nannie, I have come to you because I am desperate, and I thought
perhaps you would give me courage to face them at home.  I have never
had such a hard task set me in my life; but I deserve it, and I am not
going to flinch from my duty.  I have ruined four people's lives, my
own included!'

She strangled a dry sob in her throat, then went on,--grasping the
withered hands in hers, as a drowning man might a rope,--'Nannie, do
you remember my verse you gave me this time last year?'

'Ay, Miss Gwen, my dear, surely, and many's the prayer I've offered up
at the throne of grace for you!  "Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust
also in Him, and He shall bring it to pass!"  Maybe you've come to the
end of your own ways by this time--will that be it?'

'Judgment has come on me.  I was so sure, so certain of my plans.  I
frustrated every difficulty, I forced some against their will to assist
me in carrying them out; and yet all this last year your verse has
haunted me.  I was determined to be independent of God.  I was so
self-assured, and my pride and spirit carried me through all, that I
laughed at the idea of failure; and then when the blow fell, it crushed
every atom of self-confidence and spirit out of me!  I am a poor,
miserable, broken-down creature, Nannie; what can you say to help me?'

Nannie gently withdrew her hands, and leaning forward, placed them on
Gwen's shoulders.  Then in a tender, solemn tone she said, '"Blessed
are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven!"'

There was dead silence for a few moments, and then Gwen bowed her head
in her old nurse's lap, and tears came thick and fast.

Nannie let her cry on, but her lips moved in prayer.  'Dear Lord, Thou
hast smitten to heal; Thou hast broken to mend; let her meet with Thee
now, and get Thy blessing!'

'I have never shed a tear until now,' uttered Gwen at last, looking up
at Nannie with almost a pathetic look in her tear-dimmed eyes.  'I felt
my trouble was too great for tears.  I was turning to stone until I saw
you.  Oh, Nannie, if you knew all, you would be sorry for me!'

Will you be telling it to me, Miss Gwen?'

'Yes, indeed I will.'

Gwen gave a rough sketch of her life for the first month with her
brother.  She told of the bitter blow it was to find him about to be
married; and then told Nannie of Mr. Montmorency's arrival, and the
pressure put upon her brother to sell his farm, and join him in his
quest for gold.

'I gave him no rest, Nannie, until he promised to do as I wanted.  I
even went to the girl he was going to marry, and coaxed and entreated
her to add her persuasions to mine.  She was bitterly disappointed,
poor little thing, at their marriage being postponed, but she was
thoroughly unselfish, and only thought of Walter's good.  Mr.
Montmorency worked hard too.  He wanted more capital, and said Walter
must do his share in getting it, if he was to be a partner, so I worked
with all my might and main to get it for him.  I persuaded Meta Seton
to invest a legacy of hers in the scheme; I wrote home and implored all
the others to invest in it too.  I put all the money I had myself in
it, and then when all was done, and I had broken up Walter's home, I
sat down in complacency and waited for the success that was sure to
follow.  I can't tell you when the first doubts of the whole thing
crept into my mind.  I only know the last four months have been ones of
torturing suspense and uncertainty.  I wonder I have not come home
grey-headed.  The crash came six weeks or so ago.  Mr. Montmorency,
after ruining himself, my brother, and hundreds of others, decamped,
and has not been heard of since.  It was simply a mad speculation set
on foot by a clever man with little capital of his own.  Walter is
ruined; he has crept back to his own part of the country, and has to
begin life all over again; his hopes of a married life and a happy home
have been dashed to the ground.  Meta's father is so enraged at his
daughter's legacy being lost, that he has forbidden Walter the house,
and his bride as well as his farm has been taken from him.  I wonder he
did not curse me, as he came to see me off in the steamer; but his
face--the hopelessness and despair written there--was quite enough for
me.  And now I am going back to break to Clare and Elfie that they as
well as myself are absolute beggars.  Agatha was the only wise one
amongst us.  She refused to trust Mr. Montmorency with one farthing of
her money.'

'Ay, my dear, it's terrible--terrible for you; but loss of money is not
ruin.  You have health and strength and youth to sustain you, and
though the cloud has been dark, it will have a silver lining!'

'How can I tell them!' cried Gwen; and her face grew set and hard, as
she stood up, and dashed the tear-drops from her eyelashes.  'They have
no idea I am returning home, or what has happened.  I have been to our
lawyer before I came to you, and though he has heard bad reports of Mr.
Montmorency, he has never said a word to them.  Do you realize I have
beggared our whole family, Nannie?  Poor Clare has had trouble enough
of her own, without this in addition; and Elfie, who has never had a
care or thought, how will she take it?  I wish--I wish I were dead!'

'Hush, hush, my dear!' said Nannie, almost sternly.  'That would be a
coward's wish, and you are not that!  If you learn the lesson the Lord
would have you learn, you may yet live to find that this big trouble
has been the biggest blessing in your life.'

'Do you think if I had been like Agatha, who prays even if she goes
shopping that she may spend the money properly, and if I had committed
my plans to God, this would have happened, Nannie?'

'No, I don't think it would,' was Nannie's grave reply.

Then there was silence, which Nannie broke by begging Gwen to have some
refreshment.

'No, thank you, Nannie, I must be going.  I wish I had done with life,
and was in an almshouse with you.  It would be so easy to be all that
one ought to be.  Good-bye, you old dear.  Pray for me, for I have a
dreadful time before me, and I don't see how on earth we are to live.
I shall have to earn money somehow at once.  Perhaps I shall go into
service--that is the fashion now.  Ladies are becoming servants to the
class who used to be in service.  Give me your blessing and let me go!'

Gwen was talking fast and lightly to hide her emotion, but old Nannie
took hold of her hands and looked up at her very solemnly.

'My dear Miss Gwen, you have heard God's voice speaking to you many
times since you were a little girl.  You are hearing it again now.  Are
you going to close your ear to it?  If your pride and self-confidence
is crumbled to dust, 'tis the opportunity to confess it to Him who
hates a proud look, and says the humble shall be exalted.  Take your
bitterness of soul to the Saviour, and He will heal and comfort you.
Promise me you will listen to His voice!'

'You're a saint, Nannie; I promise you I will pray, if I have never
done so before.  Good-bye.'

She went out into the pouring rain, found her way back to the station,
and an hour after was at Waterloo Station starting for Brambleton.  She
was just getting into the carriage when some one accosted her.  It was
Clement Arkwright, who had travelled out to California with her.  He
looked unfeignedly pleased to see her.

'Just come home again, Miss Dane?  How did you like California?'

Gwen hardly knew how to answer him.  A rush of memories came over her.
The time on board ship when she had so systematically avoided him, and
cultivated with assiduity the one who had ruined her, stood up before
her with awful distinctness.  But she pulled herself together, and
tried to speak unconcernedly.

'I am glad to be back again.'

'How is your brother?  I hope the report I heard was not true, that he
had joined Alf Montmorency in his search for gold?'

Gwen was in the carriage now, and the train was just starting.  She
spoke on the impulse of the moment, and Clement Arkwright never forgot
the look of despairing hopelessness on her face as she held out her
hand to him.

'Good-bye--we are off.  You told me once that I would bring disaster
upon myself by my obstinate wilfulness.  I have done so.  You warned me
on the steamer against Mr. Montmorency.  But I would not listen, and he
has ruined the whole lot of us.'

The train steamed out of the station, and Clement Arkwright turned away
with a grave, thoughtful face.

'Poor Gwen!  Yet it will be the making of her, if she can once be got
to confess that her judgment is not infallible.  I should like to get
hold of that scoundrel!'

It was about five o'clock when Gwen reached Brambleton.  She left her
luggage at the station, and tramped through the driving rain and wind
with fierce indifference, arriving at Jasmine Cottage with drenched
garments, and weary, footsore feet.

The lamps were lighted in the drawing-room, and the shutters were not
closed.  Gwen stepped quietly up to the window and looked in.  It was a
cosy, cheerful scene.  Agatha was sitting with a smile on her face by a
bright fire, knitting in hand.  Clare was reading aloud on the opposite
side of the fireplace, and Elfie in her favourite position on the low
fender-stool, tempting a grey Persian kitten to perform acrobatical
antics with Agatha's ball of wool.

'How changed will be the scene a few minutes later!' thought Gwen
bitterly, and she knocked sharply at the door.  It was opened by a maid
who had superseded Jane, and who looked suspiciously at the drenched
figure.

'You have mistaken this for the vicarage,' she said superciliously.
'If you want shelter or food, you will get it there!'

Gwen swung her aside with a quick impatient laugh, and opened the
drawing-room door.  In another moment, with cries of astonishment and
delight, her sisters were caressing and welcoming her; but she pushed
them away from her.

'Let me tell you how I come back first,' she said sharply.  'You will
not give me such a hearty welcome when you know.  I have ruined Walter;
the gold company has been a big swindle, and every penny of our money
has all gone.  Now what do you say to me?'

'Never mind the money now,' said Agatha, who was never discomposed.
'Come upstairs to bed at once, you are wet through.  How could you walk
through such a storm!  Not another word till you have had something to
eat.  Come along--you are dead beat.'

She led her away, motioning to Clare and Elfie not to follow, and they
stood looking at each other with dazed, bewildered eyes.

'Does she mean it?  Is it really true?' exclaimed Elfie, 'Oh, how ill
she looks!'

'What a dreadful thing for Walter!' was Clare's response; and then the
full force of Gwen's words dawned upon them.

'Whatever shall we do?  Agatha's hundred pounds will not keep four of
us!'

When Agatha returned to the room, nearly an hour later, she found an
anxious consultation going on by the fire.  Her face was just as placid
as usual, though a shade graver.

'I have left her to sleep,' she said; 'it is the best thing for her.
She seems quite worn out, and I think it is best for none of us to go
near her till the morning.'

'Is it really true what she says?'

'I am afraid so.  I would not let her give me details.  She is so
filled with remorse at having persuaded you to invest your money so,
that I saw she was working herself into a perfect fever over it, and I
stopped her at once.  I am thankful she is home again.  I have been
very uneasy about her lately.'

'I never thought you were uneasy about anything,' said Clare, trying to
smile.

'We are planning what we can do to earn our livelihood, Agatha,' said
Elfie.  'Have you any idea to give us?'

'We will not go into that to-night,' was Agatha's quiet response.
'This house is our own, and so is the furniture.  We have sufficient
for the present.  When Gwen has got over the fatigue of her journey, we
will have a talk together about ways and means.'

Just before going to her own room for the night, Agatha stepped quietly
into Gwen's room.

She found her lying wide awake staring at the flickering fire with a
hard set face, and determined lips.  Agatha came up and put her hand on
her forehead.

'You are feverish,' she said.  'Are you comfortable?  Do you not feel
sleepy?'

'Would you?' was the quick retort.

'I am sure I should, after the journey you have had.  Oh, Gwen dear,
don't look so!  There are worse losses than money.  Don't reproach
yourself too much.'  And Agatha was so touched by the hopeless misery
in her sister's face that tears filled her eyes.

Gwen looked at her, and her face began to soften.

'You're a good old thing, Agatha.  I wish I were more like you.  You
will need all your faith and prayer now, and so will the others.
Good-night.'

She turned her face away, and with a kiss and an unspoken prayer,
Agatha left her.




CHAPTER XVII

Elfie's Choice

  'Go, whate'er the lot may be
  That my Father sends to me,
  Never am I comfortless
  With His Word to aid and bless;
  And while He His help is bringing,
  I will cheer the way with singing.'--_Farningham._


Gwen refused to have her breakfast in bed the next morning, and
appeared downstairs at the usual hour with a white determined face.

She looked in astonishment at Elfie, who was flitting round the room
singing merrily, as she added fresh flowers to the vases on the
breakfast table.

'Well,' said Elfie, a little defiantly, 'I am not going to be
miserable, even if we have lost our money.  There is no death in the
house, and they say beggars have lighter hearts than kings!'

And she would not have breakfast a silent meal, but chatted and
laughed, and had so much to tell Gwen of all that had happened during
her absence, that she infected the others with her light-hearted gaiety.

It was after Agatha had done her housekeeping that, sitting round the
fire, Gwen gave them full details of all they wished to know.  She did
not spare herself, and her sisters wondered at the change in her, for
never before in their lives had they known Gwen to own herself in the
wrong.  Then ways and means were discussed, Agatha declared she would
send away the two maids at once, and then with the help of a woman from
the village, she was sure they could still live together on her income;
but this the others would not hear of.

'I would set up a village shop if I had capital,' asserted Gwen, with a
little of her old spirit; 'the _role_ of governess for needy women is
past and gone; but for myself I know I shall not do better than stick
to literature.  I can write, and I have had many openings which I have
refused, because I did not want the grind of it.  If I set to work in
earnest now, I shall soon bring some grist to the mill.'

'By the bye,' said Agatha, 'I wonder if you could make anything of a
fat bundle of manuscripts that Mr. Lester bequeathed to me.  I know you
love any ancient papers, and though they're Latin and Greek to me, you
may make something of them.'

She left the room, and soon returned with the papers.  Gwen's eyes
glistened as she looked them through.  And she seemed to forget time
and surroundings as she sat down and pored over them with eager
interest.

At last she looked up.

Agatha, if I can put these together, it will prove a valuable legacy.
Will you hand them over to me?  There will be months' work, but it will
be well worth the labour.  I know some men in London would give you
hundreds of pounds for some of these papers, but I shall not let them
slip out of my hands.'

'I am so glad you will be able to make something of them,' responded
Agatha simply.  'He said I might make what use I liked of them, so I
willingly give them to you.'

'So Gwen's livelihood is secured,' said Clare, trying to speak lightly.
'Now let me tell you what I propose to do.  The other day Miss Villars
asked me if I knew of any lady who would undertake the post of matron
to a small Convalescent Home for clergymen's wives and daughters.  It
is a private one that Miss Villars has started herself.  She said she
wanted some one who was quite a lady, and who would be able to make
every one feel comfortable and at home.  The salary would be about 50
pounds.  She said she would only give the post to some one who was
really needing the money.  I believe she would give it to me at once if
I told her how things were with us, and I should like it.  I mean to go
over to her this afternoon and ask her about it.  Well, Agatha, don't
you approve?  Do you think me too incapable for the housekeeping?'

Clare finished her proposal rather wistfully, and Gwen looked at her in
wonder.  She had noticed, as perhaps the others had not, the great
change that had passed over the wilful, capricious girl during the last
six months.  There was a subdued tone in her voice, but a glad light in
her eye and a quiet restfulness about her manner that had been utterly
foreign to her before.

Clare had come through the refining fire, softened and purified; she
was a little quieter than she used to be, but every now and then her
old, clear laugh would ring out, and if her moods were not so mirthful
as Elfie's, they were quite as bright.  Quietly and unassumingly she
had slipped into the way of giving her help whenever it was needed, and
now when Agatha contemplated the possibility of a coming separation
from her, she began to realize how much she would miss her.  The
conversation continued, and then Elfie put in her word.

'And now what in the world am I to do?  Will you agree to letting me go
up to London and play to the public?  I could get pushed on by
Professor S----.  He told me in Germany he could give me several very
good introductions, if I wished to make music my profession.  There is
really nothing else I am good at.'

No one would hear of this suggestion, and later in the day Agatha
confided to Gwen a little of her anxiety about Alick Lester and Elfie.

'I do not think it is fancy.  He is a great deal here--more than I
like--and now he has no eyes or ears for any one but her.  I do not
know whether she likes him; I notice she is self-conscious and absorbed
when he is here, and that is not at all natural to her.'

'What prospects has he?' asked Gwen abruptly.

'I don't know.  I sometimes wish I knew a little more about him.  Ever
since he has opened the cupboard, he has had something weighing on his
mind, and though he tells me he has only about 200 pounds a year to
live upon, he seems in no hurry to get anything to do.  It is an idle
life for him in this small village.  He is with his cousin most of his
time, but he drops in to see us in the evening; in fact, they both come
here a great deal, and though Miss Miller has put her veto on it,
nothing will keep them away.'

'I wish Elfie would marry.  She is not fit to fight life's battle;' and
Gwen sighed as she spoke, and her face relapsed into its now habitual
gloom.

But the next day brought a letter that decided Elfie's fate.

She opened it with a grimace at the handwriting.

'Now what does Cousin James want to say to me!  Do you think he has
heard of our misfortunes?'

She read on, and her face grew thoughtful.  Instead of handing it over
to any of her sisters to read, she left the room with it in her hand.

And in the privacy of her own bedroom she spread it out before her, and
a hard and sore battle commenced in her heart.

The letter was as follows:--


'DEAR ELFRIDA,--

'I have just heard in the city from Watkins, that your clever sister
has squandered out in California, all the money that was left you by
our aunt.  It is a pity that you are all so wilful and ignorant about
money matters.  However, I am quite willing to come forward and offer
my help, though in these hard times, with such an establishment as Dane
Hall to keep up, I find it increasingly difficult to live within my
income.  Your cousin Helen is in very delicate health, and has for some
time past felt unequal to managing our large household.  She needs some
bright companionship; and I now offer you a home with us, on condition
that you make yourself generally useful, and relieve your cousin of all
the house-keeping details that fret and annoy her.  I shall allow you a
handsome allowance for dress in addition, as I shall wish to see you
suitably dressed for our position here.  Let me hear how soon you can
come, and I will arrange that you shall be met at the station.  Tell
Agatha I commend her for her prudence in refusing to let her money be
used for speculation.  I hope it will be a lesson to Gwendoline in the
future.  Her self-confidence needed to be shaken.

'Your affectionate cousin,
  'JAMES DANE.'


Elfie read and re-read this through in a mist of tears.

'O God,' she murmured, 'anything but this!  I cannot go.  It would be
slow torture!  Do Thou guide and direct me, and help me to decide; but
oh, if it is possible, do Thou open another door for me!'

Poor Elfie knew well enough that if she asked her sisters' advice, they
would be all agreed as to the impossibility of her accepting her
cousin's offer.  She knew her Cousin Helen would not make her house a
happy or an easy home to live in, for she was a weak, nervously-strung
woman, with an irritable temper and an abject fear of her husband,
whose will was absolute law.  And in the secret depths of Elfie's heart
there was a strong disinclination, even though she would not own it to
herself, to leave home at present.  Though Alick Lester had not said
much to her, she knew well enough what his state of feelings were about
her; his frequent visits were becoming very pleasant to her, and to
leave it all, and perhaps never see him again, was hard to contemplate
calmly.  He often talked to her of going abroad, and she feared he
might do so at once, were she gone.  Yet, as she looked the matter
straight in the face, she could not but acknowledge to herself that she
had no right to refuse it.

'I will not live on Agatha's money; she would share her last crust with
any of us, but I am young and strong, and this has come when I am
looking out for employment.  Many a girl would be thankful to have such
a home offered her.  I must go and do my best, and I must decide
myself, without listening to the others.  But oh, it will be a hard
life after our happy little home together here!'

The battle was won after she had knelt in prayer, and when she joined
her sisters again she was her sunny self.

But when she let them read the letter, they were all indignant at the
thought of it.

'I should think you would rather sweep a crossing than go!'

'To be a dependent on Cousin James, and a member of his household,
would be more than flesh and blood could stand!'

'Can you imagine the life of Cousin Helen's companion?'

And so on, until throwing back her little head importantly, Elfie was
able to protest.

'I know you won't approve of it, but I have decided that I shall go,
and you must look at the advantages and make the best of it if you want
to help me.'

'You shall never go with my consent,' said Agatha, roused from her
usual placidity.

'Then,' said Elfie, laughing, 'I shall go without it, or rather, I
shall never rest till I have coaxed a consent out of you.  Think of
living in the dear old place we all love so well, in the lap of luxury,
with nothing to do but dress well, and eat well, and order the dinners,
and see that the servants do their work properly!  And hasn't it just
come at the right time, when my future was so unsettled?  Now if Clare
succeeds in her plan we shall be all provided for, and life will go
smoothly again.  And we must comfort ourselves with the thought that we
are only paying visits away from home, and perhaps next Christmas we
may get together again!'

She rattled on, and then ran out of the room to hide the little choke
in her throat, and her sisters looked at each other in bewilderment.

'I never could have thought Elfie would have entertained the idea for a
minute,' said Agatha; 'she cannot have the same feelings we have about
Cousin James if she can so calmly accept his offer.  But she was away
in Germany, I remember, when it all happened.  I suppose it is rather
attractive to her than otherwise.  She does not know Cousin Helen as we
do.'

'She has no proper pride,' said Gwen, with flashing eyes; and then she
pulled herself up.

'Well, I have driven her to it.  That will be consolation to me!'

'She talks very lightly of leaving home,' said Clare.  'I wish I had
her happy way of looking at things.  Nothing seems to trouble her.'

It needed a great deal of coaxing and persuasion to bring her sisters
round to her way of thinking; but Elfie was allowed at last to send off
her letter accepting her cousin's offer, and none of them ever knew how
much it cost her to do it.

Her sunny temper and light-hearted mirth often hid a good deal of
feeling; but, like many others with such a disposition, she never got
the credit of taking life seriously.

'She is such a child,' Agatha would say; 'she will be happy in any
circumstances.  I am thankful she does not feel things deeply.'

And so none but One above knew the scalding tears dropped in secret,
and the terrible sinking of heart with which she viewed her future.

Clare went over to see Miss Villars in the afternoon, and after a long
talk obtained the post she coveted.

'You know,' she confided to her friend, 'since I have felt so
differently about things, I have been longing to do some work for God.
It is very pleasant living at home, but it is an idle life, isn't it?
With Miss Miller's energy, and Agatha aiding her in all the village
work, there is nothing left for me, and I long if I can to influence
others for good.'

'I am so thankful to hear you say so, and doubly thankful to think of
you being in a position to influence others of your own class.  The
young people at the convalescent home will be so much more likely to
confide in you, and be impressed by what you say, from the very fact of
your being young yourself, and not beyond all the innocent pleasures of
youth.'

'But,' said Clare depreciatingly, 'I am such a beginner; that is the
one thing frightens me--my want of experience.  And I am still very
moody, Miss Villars.  Don't smile; I do think at the bottom of my heart
my restlessness and discontent is gone; but some days everything seems
black, and I wonder if I am a real Christian after all.  I wish I had
your feelings.'

'Oh, these feelings!' said Miss Villars, with a little laugh.  'You
will be better, my dear child, when your life is more filled up, and
you have so much of others' troubles and pleasures to think of, that
you will have no time for your own.'

So Clare came back with her future settled, and the sisters were very
busy for the next few weeks making preparation for the two departing
ones.  Alick and his cousin were in and out, and the former seemed to
get doubly depressed when he heard that Elfie was going away.  Yet up
to the last his tongue seemed tied, and it was not until she was
actually in the railway carriage that he said a word.  He had insisted
upon seeing her off, and Agatha, fussing over the luggage, was not
aware that anything passed between them.

Holding Elfie's hand tightly in his own, he said huskily and with
emphasis:--

'You won't forget me?  I shall see you again; and meanwhile, believe I
mean it!'

That was all that was said, but the two understood each other, and
Elfie leant back in her seat, as the train steamed out of the station,
with joy throbbing through her heart.

'I shall not be at Cousin James' long, I am sure,' she repeated over
and over to herself; and so bravely and cheerfully she took up her new
life, and her letters home were so bright and amusing, that both Agatha
and Gwen thought that she was perfectly happy and well.




CHAPTER XVIII

Patty's Grave

  'But when they left her to herself again,
  Death, like a friend's voice from a distant field,
  Approaching through the darkness, called.'--_Tennyson._


The summer came and went very quietly.  Gwen remained with Agatha, but
was wholly engrossed in her writing.  Sometimes Agatha would
remonstrate with her, when she came to breakfast looking worn and
haggard, and confessing she had been writing in the study till between
two and three in the morning.

'You will wear yourself out.  Why don't you take it more quietly?
There is no need for such labour.'

'You would realize the need if you were in my shoes,' said Gwen, 'and
felt your debts hanging over your head every minute of the day.  I will
never rest until I have repaid all that has been lost.'

'But that will be impossible, and unnecessary.'

'I don't think so,' was the curt reply.

Gwen was much up in town, sometimes at the British Museum, and she
worked away at Mr. Lester's manuscripts whenever she could spare time
from her usual writing.  One afternoon she rejoiced Agatha's heart by
announcing her intention of taking a walk.

'I shall stroll over to the Howitts.  Have you any message for Deb?'

'I think not.  I hear that Patty has not been well this last week.  You
might take her a little pudding.  Deb was not working at the vicarage
this week because of her illness.'

Gwen set out, and the fresh, keen autumn air refreshed and invigorated
her.  She found the little cottage nearly hidden from view by the
heavily-laden apple trees, but there was a stillness about the place
that was not usual.  The door was on the latch, and when she stepped
inside the kitchen, it was empty.

However, the door leading into the sisters' bedroom was ajar, and Gwen
found Patty in bed, and Deb vainly endeavouring to make her swallow a
basin of gruel.

'It isn't gruel I'll be wantin', when I know how you burns my best
'namel saucepan in the doin' of it.  'Tis a mercy I've got the honey
all in, and now there'll be the apples to be gathered and preserved;
and who's to have the doin' of it, wi' you, whose heart and hands are
only in the dressmakin', and me a achin' and smartin' wi' pains from
head to toe, and worse to foller?'

'Then I'll away to the doctor this blessed minit, and Miss Miller will
be for sendin' that parish nurse she's a startin' of, and who's a
kickin' up her heels with naught to keep her out o' mischief.  She'll
be flyin' down here wi' the greatest joy, and will handle your pots and
pans as poor me isn't able, and I'll be back to my dressmakin', not
being of no manner o' use in tendin' a sick sister, who's that
partickler, and full o' fuss----'

Deb stopped here, catching sight of Gwen, and her face brightened as
she turned to her.

'Come in, my dear; we're just two quarrelsome old women, as you know,
and Patty, poor thing! is a new hand at illness.  'Tis a bad attack o'
cold in the innards--flannelation o' the lung, a neighbour thinks; but
she be a contrary patient, and she won't have no doctor.'

Gwen stepped up to the invalid, and looked down with pity upon the thin
gaunt frame stretched on the tiny bed.  Patty's face was flushed, her
lips dry and parched, and her eyes feverishly bright.  She seemed very
talkative.

'Come in, miss, and welcome.  Better in here, where I can see things is
what they should be, than out in the kitchen, which to my certain
knowledge hasn't been cleaned out proper since I took to bed, and that
was week ago yesterday.  If I could get better, please God, I never
would put off the scrubbin' out o' the cupboards agen.  Twas Toosday,
the day for to do 'em, and I says to myself, "I seem strangely tired,
I'll leave it till tomorrow;" and Wednesday found me in my bed, too bad
to move, and the cupboards hasn't had their right chance yet, and Deb
she be but a poor cleaner.  Ay, dearie me, it'll go hard wi' me if I'm
not so much as able to wash myself, and--but there, the good Lord will
take me home when it comes to that, for when my cleanin' days be over
my livin' days will be over too.'

'Now look here,' said Gwen authoritatively, 'you are talking yourself
into a fever.  Lie still, take your gruel, and hear me do the talking.
Now, Deb, give me the stuff.  It looks delicious.  I'll turn nurse.'

There was no resisting Gwen.  Patty took it from her hands as meekly as
a child, and Deb heaved a deep sigh of relief when she saw the last
drop swallowed.

''Tis a great gift to be determined in your will,' she said to Gwen.
'Patty never has had any who could master her.  We be both so
masterful; that is where all the trouble cometh between us.'

'Determination, or, rather, self will, has been my curse,' said Gwen,
with a smile and a sigh.

'Now has it now?' said Deb, leaning her bare elbows on the bed rail,
and looking at her with interest.  'Folk do say in the village that you
met with a deal o' trouble out in them foreign parts, and some haythen
rascal robbed you of all you stood up in.  When you come to see us
after your return, we kept quiet, not likin' to ask; but Patty says to
me when you'd a gone, "She's been through a deal o' trouble, for there
be hard lines on her face, and a sad ring in her laugh," and we felt
mortal sorry for you, my dear.'

'Tis a good thing to have a will,' said Patty from her pillows, 'so
long as it don't get above the Lord's will.'

'That it couldn't never do,' quickly returned Deb; 'for God Almighty
can snap a body's will like dry twigs, and He be our Master.  'Tis a
blasphemous thing to try to get the better o' our Maker; and Miss
Gwen's will be not that sort.'

'I think it has been,' said Gwen, sitting down and softly stroking one
of Patty's withered old hands.  'I thought I could manage my life and
everybody else's independent of God, and He has shown me my mistake.
It has been a bitter lesson, but I hope I have learnt it.'

There was silence.  Something in the simplicity and quaintness of this
old couple always drew out Gwen's best feelings, and she spoke to them
of things she would never mention to any one else.

'We've heerd say,' said Deb, after a pause, 'that all you young ladies
have lost your money.  But that, may be, is only a tale.'

'Very close to truth,' said Gwen; 'and my earnest desire is to earn as
much money as possible.  Can you tell me how to do it?'

'Young ladies set about such things different to us,' said Deb,
thoughtfully.

Patty looked up quickly.

'If so be that this is my last sickness, you'll not be long after me,
Deb, I'm thinkin', and then what about the golden russet?  Will Miss
Gwen like to have the use o' it?'

Gwen thought her mind was wandering, until she saw how fearfully Deb
looked round the room, as if afraid any neighbour might be within
hearing.

'Hush you now!  'Tis not the time to be talkin' of our savin's.  Miss
Gwen will take no notice o' such talk.'

And Gwen did not, only chatted on till Patty seemed to grow more
restless, and then she took her leave.  When she told Agatha how she
had found them, Agatha at once resolved to send the doctor.

'She may die.  So often, when once people like her give up and take to
their bed, they never leave it again.'

The doctor went, and thought very gravely of Patty's state.  Agatha and
Gwen were constant visitors at the cottage, and did much to comfort
poor Deb, who, now convinced that her sister might never recover, was
overwhelmed with misery.

'We come into the world together, and we're bound to go out together,'
she kept repeating; 'it ain't likely as how she'll leave me behind.'

And if a neighbour would assure her that she was well and strong, and
likely to survive her sister for many years, she would only shake her
head and say, ''Tis against nature; and if so be as her days are
numbered, then so is mine, and I shall be taken, disease or no disease.'

She went about the cottage in a solemn way, turning out old hoards,
writing in crabbed handwriting directions about various matters, and
Gwen came upon a scrap of paper one day with the following items:--

  Cost of two plain coffins  . . .
  Parish clerk's fee . . . . . . .
  Bit of ground by the corner yew.
  Bearers for Patty  . . . . . . .
  Bearers for Deborah  . . . . . .


The spaces left she evidently meant to fill up.  Gwen promptly burnt
the paper, and took her to task about it; but nothing would comfort
her, or convince her that by any possibility she could outlive her
sister.

And then one evening, quietly and simply, like a little child, Patty
passed away.  Her last words were to her sister:--

'The good Lord has got me, Deb, and He'll not let me fall.'

Deb sat by her bedside as one stunned.  She looked up pitifully when
Gwen came to her side.

'I'm still here--but I'm just waitin' my call.'

It was with difficulty that she could be induced to eat anything, and
when the time came for Patty to be carried to the grave, she saw the
little party of mourners set out in stony unconcern.

'They might have let her bide till I were ready to go, too.  It'll be a
double expense, and I can't be here much longer.'

Gwen's heart went out to the desolate old woman, and she hardly let a
day pass without going over to see her.  About a week after, she went
one afternoon, but found the house closed.  The stillness and desertion
of the cottage sent a thrill of fear through her.  Fearing that Deb's
mind had become slightly unhinged, she wondered if she had destroyed
her own life.  She tried the door, but it was locked; and then she
noticed a piece of paper tucked into the sill.  Taking it out, she
read:--

'If you be Miss Gwen, the key is under the water butt; if you be any
other body, let it be.  Deb.'

Gwen took the key up, unlocked the door, and went in.  The kitchen was
spotlessly clean, the grate shining with blacklead.  On the square deal
table lay a letter with her name upon it.  But before reading it, Gwen
hastily searched the house, to make certain that it was empty, and then
she perused the badly written epistle.


'Miss Gwen,--

'Your humble servant Deborah Howlitt write these lines to you hoping it
may find you as it leaves her at present knowing your kind heart, and I
always did have a leaning towards you more than most, and so did Patty
for her said you were a woman of good understanding I think it best to
leave you all our savings which you will find under our golden russet
in my mother's china tea-pot, for Patty said the same when she were a
dying.  And you will use them to save you from the House if your money
has gone from you.  Will you be so good as to give the clothes in our
chest of drawers to them that need them.  We did think of turning our
brown serges, and if they were ripped round the bottom and braided
afresh would be good Sunday skirts.  I have been to our grave three
nights running for I heard her calling, but the good God won't take me
yet.  I'm going to-night, and may be I shall not be back.  Patty could
not say I have not cleaned for there is no speck of dirt to be seen.
And now goodbye and never put your will against the Almighty for I am
praying not to do it myself for I am a poor old desolate woman and if
He says "Live," I will live, but He seems to say to-night "Come,"
and,---

  "Just as I am, without one plea,
  But that Thy blood was shed for me,
  And that Thou bidst me come to Thee,
  O Lamb of God, I come!"

'Your obedient servant,
  'DEBORAH HOWLITT.'


Gwen hurriedly left the cottage after reading this, and went straight
to the churchyard.  No one evidently had been near Patty's grave that
day, for there, lying in long grass, with her arms crossed on the
uncovered mound, and her grey head bowed upon them, was the cold, stiff
form of poor Deb.  How many hours she had been there in the still
coldness of an October's night no one could tell; but the doctor put
down her death to grief and exposure.  Gwen broke the tidings to Agatha
with a sob in her voice.

'I loved those old women.  They were the only friends I had here.'




CHAPTER XIX

The Rightful Heir

  And words of true love pass from tongue to tongue,
  As singing birds from one bough to another.'--_Longfellow._


When Gwen had the savings of the old women dug up from the roots of
their favourite apple-tree, she found to her amazement that no less
than 95 pounds had been put away in the old teapot, and for some time
she hesitated about appropriating it.

Miss Miller came round to advise, for she was most excited about it all.

'I have been making inquiries, my dear, about their relatives as if you
feel any qualms about taking their savings, I thought you would be glad
to hear of their next-of-kin.  But they seem to have no one left
belonging to them.  A friend of mine in this neighbourhood was left 300
pounds by an old nurse once.  She founded a parish room and club with
it, and I need not say that if you wish to give it away in charity, I
shall be very glad to advise you.  I said to Wilfrid that I did not
believe you would keep it yourself, for though tales have been flying
about that you and your two younger sisters have lost your money, I can
see that you are not destitute.  You still keep a very good table, for
Mrs. Stone tells me she supplies you with poultry and eggs, and is not
able to sell me her fowls under 2s. 6d; as she says you always give a
fair price for your things.'

'I have quite made up my mind about the way in which I shall use it,
Miss Miller,' said Gwen, trying hard to speak politely.

There was never any love lost between that good lady and herself, and
Agatha dreaded every encounter between them.

'On some pet charity of your own?'

'You may call it so, if you like;' and nothing more would Gwen say on
the subject.

Later on, she told Agatha she would send it straight to Walter.

'He is on my mind dreadfully.  Not one word of reproach did he ever
give me, and I am thankful I can help him this much.  It is more of a
charity to give it to him than let it drift through Miss Miller's
fingers.  What an odious woman she is!'

'Oh, hush!  I can't bear to hear you talk so.  She has no tact, and
makes many blunders, but is really thoroughly kind at heart.  I never
mind her speeches.  I don't think any one does who really knows her.
But I am very glad you are sending it out to Walter, and I shall be
able to add a little to it when you do so.  Our expenses are very small
now, and if you will not let me spend any on yourself, I shall gladly
send it abroad.'

'How well old Nannie's text has fitted into your life!' said Gwen,
musing: '"Trust in the Lord, and do good, . . . and verily thou shalt
be fed."  You have proved that promise true, for you are the only one
of us all that is provided for life.'

I think we have all been cared for so far,' said Agatha quietly.  'You
will find your verse no less true than mine: "Commit thy way unto the
Lord, trust also in Him, and He shall bring it to pass."'

Gwen was silent.  She could not talk freely about her feelings to any
one, but she had, as she expressed it to Deb, 'learnt her lesson.'  Her
self-confidence had been shaken to the roots, and she was no longer
desirous of following her own plans to the exclusion of all advice from
others.  Having discovered that she could make mistakes, she began to
wonder whether her life had not been full of them; and the gradual
conviction of this drove her to her knees, and led her to the feet of
the great Teacher as a little child.

One evening, soon after poor Deb's death, Agatha and Gwen were sitting
down to a cosy evening together, when they were surprised by the sudden
entrance of Alick Lester.  He seemed strangely perturbed, and very
anxious to pour out his trouble into Agatha's ears.  When Gwen made a
movement to go, he begged her to remain.

'You will all know it soon.  It will be no secret, but I'd give a good
deal to have prevented it coming out now.  May I begin from the
beginning?'

Then, taking a seat, he plunged into it at once.

'You know I found some papers in my father's cupboard.  He knew of
them, but had never given me a hint of it, except that he had made me
promise to be home if possible last autumn.  It appears that my
grandfather before he died made a codicil to his will, and handed it
over to the keeping of my father, forbidding him to ever show it to any
one, until the right time came to act upon it.  I suppose the poor old
man may have wished to right matters a little, and had got over his
bitterness about my father's marriage.  I know he took a good deal of
notice of me as a small boy, but I never dreamt he had any special
reason for it.  The codicil simply transferred the whole of his
property from the hands of my uncle to myself when I should reach my
twenty-sixth year.  This I did last September, and this accounts for my
father's anxiety to have me back at that time.  It appears now that my
uncle's valet got wind of this--how, and where, I can't imagine--but he
told my uncle he knew my father held some important papers in his hands
that concerned him.  And after my father's death, as you know, Miss
Dane, my uncle came down here to try and get hold of them.  Well, after
our return, I suppose the delight of having Roger back again put the
whole affair out of my uncle's head, but lately he hasn't been very
well--at least that is the most charitable way to look at it--and he
has been perpetually nagging at me about the contents of the cupboard,
and asking to see them.'

'I cannot think why you did not show them at once to him,' interrupted
Agatha.

The young fellow looked a little confused.

'I daresay you may think me an ass, but I could not for the life of me
bear the thought of turning the old man out after all these years.  He
hasn't got many more years to live, and has seemed so perfectly secure
in his possession that I hadn't the heart to show the codicil to him.
Of course, I know most people would call me a fool--our old lawyer
practically did so--but I put off doing anything about it, as much for
the sake of Roger, perhaps, as his father.

'Well, last night I lost my temper, and when my uncle began to attack
my father's good name, and hint that he had dishonourably kept family
papers from the head of the family, I whipped out the codicil in his
face, and asked him to read it through.  Of course there was an awful
row.  At first he thought I had forged it, and he telegraphed to his
lawyer, who came down the first thing this morning, and we had a great
consultation in the library.  Then my uncle shut himself up in his
room, and has refused to see me since.  I don't know how it will all
end.  I have begged and implored Roger to persuade him to stay on, and
let things be as they were; but he won't hear of it, and meditates
leaving at once.  I feel awfully low about it, but what can I do?'

'You are a very quixotic young man,' said Gwen, unable to keep from
smiling at the woe-begone face in front of her.  'You should be
thankful it's all out, and your uncle knows the truth.'

'Yes, and to a certain extent I am.  But I don't want them to clear
out, and leave me in possession.  I never expected to be a rich man,
and don't altogether like the idea of settling down here.'

Gwen laughed again, and left the room, saying, 'You shouldn't quarrel
with good fortune when it comes to you.'

For a moment there was silence, then Alick turned to Agatha a little
awkwardly, a blush coming to his bronzed cheeks.

'Miss Dane, do you know my one comfort in all this?  It is thinking
that now I have a right to speak to your sister.'

'To Elfie?' asked Agatha.

'Yes, I am sure you won't raise an objection, will you?  I know I'm not
half good enough for her; but if she'll only listen to me, I feel as if
life will be too good to live.'

And for the next half-hour Agatha listened to a flow of eloquence on
Elfie's perfections, which amused and yet touched her, for it showed
her how deeply devoted the young man was in his love.

Major Lester was not long in leaving the Hall.  He announced his
intention of travelling abroad with his son, and before a month was
gone Alick was left alone.  The cousins parted with mutual regret.
Roger took the blow to his future prospects bravely and manfully, and
told Alick that he looked forward to see his bride at the Hall very
soon.

And then, one day, without a word to any one, Alick travelled down to
Dane Hall.

Elfie had been having a trying time--a time that tested all her powers
of cheerfulness to carry her through it.  Mrs. Dane was confined to her
room with bronchitis, not ill enough to lie still and leave the
responsibility of her household to Elfie, but perpetually questioning
the girl's management, and giving contrary orders to the servants, who
were all in a state of irritation and turbulence.  Mr. Dane was
impatient of the slightest hitch in the domestic machinery, and, now
that his wife was too indisposed to hear his complaints, vented all his
ill-humour upon his young cousin.

But Elfie's sunny temper did not forsake her; and if, in the privacy of
her own room, home-sickness and loneliness got the better of her at
times, she always preserved a cheerful front in public, and earnestly
strove, not only to do her duty, but to be happy in doing it, and to
make those around her happy too.

It was a bright, spring afternoon, when, at last relieved from
attendance on the invalid, Elfie took her hat and went out into the
garden to enjoy the fresh air and sunshine.  She was singing away to
herself and gathering some jonquils for the dinner-table, when she was
joined by her cousin James.

'Elfrida, I am told that neither of the carriage horses can be taken
out.  It is extraordinary that with four horses doing hardly anything
there should be this constant difficulty in getting one of them to
drive.'

'Yes,' said Elfie a little carelessly, 'I have always heard that the
more horses you have the less work you get out of them.  Where do you
want to go, Cousin James?  Can't you take Firefly in the dog-cart?'

'It does not matter to you where I wish to go.  I wish to drive the
pair, and I am convinced this new groom is an utterly incompetent man.
Ever since we have been in this house we have had a perpetual change of
servants, and I was in hopes that when you came it would be different.'

'I am not responsible for your grooms.  I have nothing to do with
them,' said Elfie brightly.  'I should ask Fenton what he think of this
new groom.'

'Fenton is insufferable with his insolent bearing and behaviour, and
you encourage him in his familiarity.  I heard you were taking tea with
him and his wife yesterday.  I must beg you never to do such a thing
again as long as you are under my roof.'

'You must remember, Cousin James, Fenton has known us all since we were
tiny children.  He gave us our first riding lessons, and Aunt Mildred
treated him very differently to most of the servants.  He lived with
her for forty years, he was telling me.'

'I don't wish for any arguments, if I give you an order.  I think you
sometimes forget your position with us.  You are here to relieve your
cousin Helen of all worry and anxiety about household matters, and it
has been a great disappointment to us both that you seem incapable of
keeping things straight.  I hear that the cook is leaving, and has been
exceedingly insolent to your cousin, telling her that she will not have
two mistresses.  I do not wish to interfere in these matters, but I
must request you to make more effort to maintain the discipline
necessary in such a large household.'

Elfie was so accustomed to these daily grumblings that she went on
picking her flowers in silence; the brightness of the day seemed
already clouded for her, and she gave an involuntary sigh, as after a
little further complaining her cousin walked away.

'They have it all, wealth and comfort all round them; and yet are two
discontented, miserable people.  I wouldn't exchange places with them
for all the world.'

'A gentleman in the drawing-room has called to see you, miss.'

It was the footman brought the message.

Elfie started, flushed, and then went into the house to meet her fate.
There was only one person it could be, and her instinct told her that
life would be different after this interview to what it was at present.
Her time of uncertainty and waiting was now at an end, and Dane Hall
would soon be her home no more.




CHAPTER XX

Brought Back

  'Far, far above thy thought
    His wisdom shall appear,
  When fully He this work hath wrought,
    That caused thy needless fear!'


Three months later.  Jasmine Cottage was full of lively voices and
laughter.  Clare and Elfie were both at home, the former for a month's
holiday, and the latter till she left it to take up her quarters in the
Hall as bride and mistress.  Alick was there, with no cloud upon his
brow, and full of eager anticipation of all that he was going to do
upon the estate in the future; and Agatha and Clare looked on at the
young couple with interest and sympathy.  They were gathered together
in the verandah, and Gwen only was absent.  Alick presently asked for
her.

'She has gone to London to her publishers.  You will be interested to
know, Alick, that it is about your father's manuscripts.  Gwen has
finished them at last, and it is to consult about bringing them out,
that she has gone.  We expect her back every moment.'

Agatha looked along the road as she spoke, and Alick's eyes followed
her gaze.

'Here she comes; I know her walk!' he exclaimed.  'Rapid, defiant, and
indifferent to all around!'

'You shall not talk of her like that,' remonstrated Elfie, 'and it
isn't true of her.'

'I admire her awfully, only I'm just a little bit afraid of her.'

'I don't believe you're afraid of any one!'

Here Gwen appeared on the scene.  She seemed flushed and rather
perturbed.

'Have I got my business done satisfactorily?  Yes, I hope I have.
Agatha, I am famishing; have you got anything for me to eat?  That's
right.  I will go straight into the dining-room now.'

Agatha followed her in.

'You look tired out.  Sit down, and I will pour you out a cup of
coffee.  I expected you back earlier.'

'I was detained.'

For a few minutes there was silence.  Then Gwen leant back in her chair
and regarded Agatha with serious eyes.

'You're a safe old thing.  I think I can trust you,' she said.  'First
of all tell me, do you think Clare happy now?'

'I have never known her so happy in her life before,' said Agatha,
wondering at Gwen's tone.  'Of course, I know she has her sad times,
but she is far sweeter and even-tempered than she used to be.  Miss
Villars was telling me the other day, she has found her niche exactly.
All the visitors at the Convalescent Home are loud in their praise
other, and I really think her heart is in it.'

'Then it would be a pity to disturb her.'

'What do you mean?'

'Well, the fact is, I heard in town to-day rumours about Hugh turning
up at some mission station in Africa.  People say he was never killed
after all.  I went to the Foreign Office about it.  They know for
certain it is some English officer, but cannot be sure it is Hugh.'

'Oh, Gwen!'

Agatha seemed too dazed by the news to say more at first.

'We must keep it to ourselves for the present.  It would be dreadful
for her if it proved a false report,' continued Gwen; 'and really, she
seems so resigned now, that one dreads the effect of such news upon
her.  Do you think she ever really cared for him?  I have my doubts.  I
remember how restless, and discontented she used to be when he was
alive; and look at the change in her now!'

'Yes,' said Agatha quietly; 'but the change is not due to his death,
Gwen.  Clare has found out for herself the truth of Nannie's verse for
her.  She was always restless until she came to the Rest-giver, and now
she is at peace.  Circumstances do not sway her as they used to do.'

'Well,' said Gwen, after a slight pause, 'I hope it may be true, if she
really loves him.  It is like a story-book, the long-lost lover come to
life again!  Don't say a word to any one.  They have promised to send
us the first information they receive.'

For the next few days both Agatha and Gwen appeared to the others very
restless and pre-occupied; but as a week or two passed away without
further tidings, they tried to banish it from their thoughts, and in a
measure succeeded.

Gwen was delighted at the prospects of her book coming out, and hoped
to realize a good sum from it, more than she at one time could have
thought possible to be earned by her pen.  And when, a little later,
she received the first instalment of it, she sent a cheque straight out
to Meta Seton.

'I feel convinced,' she confided to Agatha, 'that she still cares for
Walter; and it is only her father that has insisted upon her breaking
it off.  I should be so thankful if they came together again.  In
Walter's last letter he mentions having met her, and I think that they
may have arrived at a secret understanding with one another; he writes
in much better spirits.'

'If she is a wife worth having, she would never desert him for his
poverty,' said Agatha.

Gwen shook her head and sighed, for she knew the world better than
simple-minded Agatha did.  But her writing took her mind off the
startling news she had heard, and Agatha was equally engrossed in
preparing Elfie's trousseau, so that though they were always on the
watch for any news in the papers, they did not mention the subject to
one another, and it was a distinct shock to Agatha to receive a
telegram one morning.

'Captain Hugh Knox alive.  Coming home.  Break it to his friends.'

Clare was doing some work for Elfie when the telegram arrived.  Agatha
hastily consulted Gwen in the study, and then came into the
dining-room, where the two younger girls were sitting.

'Who is the telegram from?' asked Elfie quickly.  'We have so few here
that Clare and I are quite curious about it.'

Agatha sat down, and her hands trembled as she unfolded and refolded
the yellow envelope in her grasp.

'It contains very strange news,' she said slowly 'wonderfully strange,
and I don't quite know how to tell it to you.'

Both Clare and Elfie dropped their work instantly, for they saw her
agitation.

'Not bad news?' exclaimed Clare.

'No; very, very good news for you, Clare.'

Clare's cheeks grew pale at once.

'Oh, Agatha, speak out; don't keep us in suspense any longer!'

And then Agatha said as quietly as she could:

'It is about Hugh, Clare.  Can you bear it?  He was never killed, after
all, and this is to say that he is coming home.'

Clare did not faint, nor call out, nor did she utter a word.  Only the
quick blood rushing to her cheeks, and then as quickly ebbing from
them, showed that she was moved at all.  Motionless she sat, staring
out of the window as if she were in a dream.  Then at last she spoke.

'Oh, Agatha, I shall never forgive you if it is not true!'

The vehement intensity of her tone drew Agatha to her side at once.
Stooping over her she kissed her.  'My darling Clare, it is true.
Thank God with all your heart that it is so!'

And then in a few minutes a burst of tears relieved the overcharged
brain, and Clare fled to her room, there to thank on her knees for such
unlooked-for joy.

The days that followed were trying ones, but Clare bore them well.  She
went to see her lover's family, and it was there in the Yorkshire home
that she met the long-lost one again.

Captain Knox seemed but a shadow of his former self.  Fever and
privations had told upon him, and Clare shuddered when she heard his
story.  For many months he had been kept captive amongst the native
tribe that had taken him and his comrades by surprise in the bush.  He
was subject to much cruelty and many indignities, but at last managed
to make his escape, and for some months lived in the thick forests,
striving to find his way back to civilization.  At last he was found by
a missionary, almost at the point of death, and tenderly nursed back to
health and strength at a small mission station.  It was some time,
however, before he could send tidings of his escape, and long before he
was well enough to be brought down to the coast.  He had much to tell
to Clare, and also much to hear.

'I cannot believe it is really you,' she said to him, when alone with
him one day; 'I keep wondering if I shall wake up and find it all a
dream.'

'You had become accustomed to live without me, had you?' he said,
smiling.  'Would you rather I had not come back to disturb your life
again?  You seem to be so happy in your present work.'

'Oh, Hugh, if you only knew what I have gone through, you would not
talk so!  I don't think you have been out of my thoughts for a single
day.  God has helped me to bear your loss, but I never knew how your
life was woven into mine, till the awful news came that I had lost you!'

'We will not think about it,' said Captain Knox, with deep feeling.
'We have been brought together again, thank God, and I believe we are
both the better for what we have suffered.  It is wonderful to see the
way that we are led, and the goodness and love that brings sweet out of
bitter, and blessing out of evil.'

'And,' said Clare softly, as she leaned her head against his shoulder,
and felt the support of his strong arm round her, 'we have both been
drawn inside the kingdom, Hugh.  That is the best of all.  We will
serve our Master together, and not death itself can separate us now.'

One more scene before we leave the four sisters.  Nannie is the
conspicuous figure in it.  She has been brought to Jasmine Cottage, and
it is the eve of Elfie's marriage.  The girls were gathered round her
in the cosy bedroom that had been prepared for her, and they were full
of mirth and happiness.

Gwen had been astonishing them by a piece of news that she had been
keeping to herself for a long time, and this was that she had at last
listened to Clement Arkwright, and was engaged to him.

'They say that if one wedding comes off in a family, others are sure to
follow,' she said, by way of excusing herself; 'and he has been
bothering my life out lately.  I never seem to go up to town without
tumbling across him somewhere.  I think I have no spirit left to resist
him as I used to do.  But one thing I have told him, and that is that
he will have to wait till I have cleared off more of my debts.'

'You have no debts,' said Agatha; 'it is nonsense to talk like that.'

'I shall never lift up my head and breathe freely till I have at any
rate returned Walter his money,' said Gwen very emphatically.

'Ay, my dear,' put in Nannie affectionately; 'we'd rather your head
weren't lifted just yet.  'Tis apt to rear itself a little too high,
and 'tis the bowed head that gets the blessing of the Lord.'

'Nannie,' said Elfie impulsively, 'say our verses to us again, will
you?  Do you remember when you gave them to us?  Put your hands on our
heads as you used to do when we were little children, and we will
receive them again as your blessing.'

And this Nannie did; and as she repeated the beautiful words, each
sister confessed in the depths of her heart what a blessing they had
been to her.

'Trust in the Lord and do good, so shalt thou dwell in the land, and
verily thou shalt be fed.'

'Delight thyself also in the Lord, and He shall give thee the desires
of thine heart.'

'Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in Him, and He shall bring it
to pass.'

'Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for Him. . . .  Those that wait
upon the Lord, they shall inherit the earth.'

'And,' said Agatha, 'the key-note to that Psalm is, "Fret not."  We
thought it a terrible blow when Cousin James defrauded us of our
rights; but how wonderfully we have been cared for since!'

'Even when I did my best to ruin the whole lot of you,' put in Gwen.

And then Nannie repeated the last verse of her favourite Psalm:

'And the Lord shall help them and deliver them: He shall deliver them
from the wicked, and save them because they trust in Him.'




FINIS.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Carved Cupboard, by Amy Le Feuvre

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CARVED CUPBOARD ***

***** This file should be named 22232.txt or 22232.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/2/2/2/3/22232/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
