The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Little Violinist, by Thomas Bailey Aldrich

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Little Violinist

Author: Thomas Bailey Aldrich

Release Date: November 6, 2007 [EBook #23355]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE VIOLINIST ***




Produced by David Widger






THE LITTLE VIOLINIST.

By Thomas Bailey Aldrich

Boston And New York Houghton Mifflin Company

Copyright, 1873, 1885, and 1901


     Weep with me, all you that read
          This little story;
     And know, for whom a tear you shed,
          Death's self is sorry.

          Ben Jonson.


This story is no invention of mine. I could not invent anything half
so lovely and pathetic as seems to me the incident which has come
ready-made to my hand.

Some of you, doubtless, have heard of James Speaight, the infant
violinist, or Young Americus, as he was called. He was born in London, I
believe, and was only four years old when his father brought him to this
country, less than three years ago. Since that time he has appeared in
concerts and various entertainments in many of our principal cities,
attracting unusual attention by his musical skill. I confess, however,
that I had not heard of him until last month, though it seems he had
previously given two or three public performances in the city where I
live. I had not heard of him, I say, until last month; but since then I
do not think a day has passed when this child's face has not risen up in
my memory--the little half-sad face, as I saw it once, with its large,
serious eyes and infantile mouth.

I have, I trust, great tenderness for all children; but I know that I
have a special place in my heart for those poor little creatures who
figure in circuses and shows, or elsewhere, as "infant prodigies."
Heaven help such little folk! It was an unkind fate that did not make
them commonplace, stupid, happy girls and boys like our own Fannys and
Charleys and Harrys. Poor little waifs, that never know any babyhood or
childhood--sad human midges, that flutter for a moment in the glare of
the gaslights, and are gone. Pitiful little children, whose tender limbs
and minds are so torn and strained by thoughtless task-masters, that it
seems scarcely a regrettable thing when the circus caravan halts awhile
on its route to make a small grave by the wayside.

I never witness a performance of child-acrobats, or the exhibition of
any forced talent, physical or mental, on the part of children, without
protesting, at least in my own mind, against the blindness and cruelty
of their parents or guardians, or whoever has care of them.

I saw at the theatre, the other night, two tiny girls--mere babies they
were--doing such feats upon a bar of wood suspended from the ceiling as
made my blood run cold. They were twin sisters, these mites, with that
old young look on their faces which all such unfortunates have. I hardly
dared glance at them, up there in the air, hanging by their feet from
the swinging bar, twisting their fragile spines and distorting their
poor little bodies, when they ought to have been nestled in soft
blankets in a cosey chamber, with the angels that guard the sleep of
little children hovering above them. I hope that the father of those two
babies will read and ponder this page, on which I record not alone my
individual protest, but the protest of hundreds of men and women who
took no pleasure in that performance, but witnessed it with a pang of
pity.

There is a Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Dumb Animals. There
ought to be a Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Little Children;
and a certain influential gentleman, who does some things well and other
things very badly, ought to attend to it. The name of this gentleman is
Public Opinion.{1}

     1  This sketch was written in 1874. The author claims for it
     no other merit than that of having been among the earliest
     appeals for the formation of such a Society as now exists--
     the Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
     Children.

But to my story.

One September morning, about five years and a half ago, there wandered
to my fireside, hand in hand, two small personages who requested in a
foreign language, which I understood at once, to be taken in and fed and
clothed and sent to school and loved and tenderly cared for. Very modest
of them--was it not?--in view of the fact that I had never seen either
of them before. To all intents and purposes they were perfect strangers
to _me_. What was my surprise when it turned out (just as if it were in
a fairy legend) that these were my own sons! When I say they came hand
in hand, it is to advise you that these two boys were twins, like that
pair of tiny girls I just mentioned.

These young gentlemen are at present known as Charley and Talbot, in the
household, and to a very limited circle of acquaintances outside; but as
Charley has declared his intention to become a circus-rider, and Talbot,
who has not so soaring an ambition, has resolved to be a policeman, it
is likely the world will hear of them before long. In the mean time, and
with a view to the severe duties of the professions selected, they are
learning the alphabet, Charley vaulting over the hard letters with an
agility which promises well for his career as circus-rider, and Talbot
collaring the slippery S's and pursuing the suspicious X Y Z's with the
promptness and boldness of a night-watchman.

Now it is my pleasure not only to feed and clothe Masters Charley and
Talbot as if they were young princes or dukes, but to look to it that
they do not wear out their ingenious minds by too much study. So I
occasionally take them to a puppet-show or a musical entertainment, and
always in holiday time to see a pantomime. This last is their especial
delight. It is a fine thing to behold the business-like air with which
they climb into their seats in the parquet, and the gravity with which
they immediately begin to read the play-bill upside down. Then, between
the acts, the solemnity with which they extract the juice from an
orange, through a hole made with a lead-pencil, is also a noticeable
thing.

Their knowledge of the mysteries of Fairyland is at once varied and
profound. Everything delights, but nothing astonishes them. That people
covered with spangles should dive headlong through the floor; that
fairy queens should step out of the trunks of trees; that the poor
wood-cutter's cottage should change, in the twinkling of an eye, into a
glorious palace or a goblin grotto under the sea, with crimson fountains
and golden staircases and silver foliage--all that is a matter of
course. This is the kind of world they live in at present. If these
things happened at home they would not be astonished.

The other day, it was just before Christmas, I saw the boys attentively
regarding a large pumpkin which lay on the kitchen floor, waiting to
be made into pies. If that pumpkin had suddenly opened, if wheels
had sprouted out on each side, and if the two kittens playing with an
onion-skin by the range had turned into milk-white ponies and harnessed
themselves to this Cinderella coach, neither Charley nor Talbot would
have considered it an unusual circumstance.

The pantomime which is usually played at the Boston Theatre during the
holidays is to them positive proof that the stories of Cinderella
and Jack of the Beanstalk and Jack the Giant-Killer have historical
solidity. They like to be reassured on that point. So one morning last
January, when I informed Charley and Talbot, at the breakfast-table,
that Prince Rupert and his court had come to town,

          "Some in jags,
          Some in rags,
     And some in velvet gown,"

the news was received with great satisfaction; for this meant that we
were to go to the play.

For the sake of the small folk, who could not visit him at night, Prince
Rupert was gracious enough to appear every Saturday afternoon during the
month. We decided to wait upon his Highness at one of his _matinees_.

You would never have dreamed that the sun was shining brightly
outside, if you had been with us in the theatre that afternoon. All the
window-shutters were closed, and the great glass chandelier hanging from
the gayly painted dome was one blaze of light.

But brighter even than the jets of gas were the ruddy, eager faces of
countless boys and girls, fringing the balconies and crowded into the
seats below, longing for the play to begin. And nowhere were there two
merrier or more eager faces than those of Charley and Talbot, pecking
now and then at a brown paper cone filled with white grapes, which I
held, and waiting for the solemn green curtain to roll up, and disclose
the coral realm of the Naiad Queen.

I shall touch very lightly on the literary aspects of the play. Its
plot, like that of the modern novel, was of so subtile a nature as not
to be visible to the naked eye. I doubt if the dramatist himself could
have explained it, even if he had been so condescending as to attempt to
do so. There was a bold young prince--Prince Rupert, of course--who
went into Wonderland in search of adventures. He reached Wonderland by
leaping from the castle of Drachenfels into the Rhine. Then there was
one Snaps, the prince's valet, who did not in the least want to go, but
went, and got terribly frightened by the Green Demons of the Chrysolite
Cavern, which made us all laugh--it being such a pleasant thing to see
somebody else scared nearly to death. Then there were knights in brave
tin armor, and armies of fair pre-Raphaelite amazons in all the colors
of the rainbow, and troops of unhappy slave-girls, who did nothing but
smile and wear beautiful dresses, and dance continually to the most
delightful music. Now you were in an enchanted castle on the banks of
the Rhine, and now you were in a cave of amethysts and diamonds at
the bottom of the river--scene following scene with such bewildering
rapidity that finally you did not quite know where you were.

But what interested me most, and what pleased Charley and Talbot even
beyond the Naiad Queen herself, was the little violinist who came to the
German Court, and played before Prince Rupert and his bride.

It was such a little fellow! He was not more than a year older than my
own boys, and not much taller. He had a very sweet, sensitive face, with
large gray eyes, in which there was a deep-settled expression that I do
not like to see in a child. Looking at his eyes alone, you would have
said he was sixteen or seventeen, and he was merely a baby!

I do not know enough of music to assert that he had wonderful genius,
or any genius at all; but it seemed to me he played charmingly, and with
the touch of a natural musician.

At the end of his piece, he was lifted over the foot-lights of the stage
into the orchestra, where, with the conductor's _baton_ in his hand, he
directed the band in playing one or two difficult compositions. In this
he evinced a carefully trained ear and a perfect understanding of the
music.

I wanted to hear the little violin again; but as he made his bow to the
audience and ran off, it was with a half-wearied air, and I did not join
with my neighbors in calling him back. "There 's another performance
to-night," I reflected, "and the little fellow is n't very strong." He
came out, however, and bowed, but did not play again.

All the way home from the theatre my children were full of the little
violinist, and as they went along, chattering and frolicking in front of
me, and getting under my feet like a couple of young spaniels (they
did not look unlike two small brown spaniels, with their fur-trimmed
overcoats and sealskin caps and ear-lappets), I could not help thinking
how different the poor little musician's lot was from theirs.

He was only six years and a half old, and had been before the public
nearly three years. What hours of toil and weariness he must have been
passing through at the very time when my little ones were being rocked
and petted and shielded from every ungentle wind that blows! And what an
existence was his now--travelling from city to city, practising at every
spare moment, and performing night after night in some close theatre or
concert-room when he should be drinking in that deep, refreshing slumber
which childhood needs! However much he was loved by those who had charge
of him, and they must have treated him kindly, it was a hard life for
the child.

He ought to have been turned out into the sunshine; that pretty
violin--one can easily understand that he was fond of it himself--ought
to have been taken away from him, and a kite-string placed in his hand
instead. If God had set the germ of a great musician or a great composer
in that slight body, surely it would have been wise to let the precious
gift ripen and flower in its own good season.

This is what I thought, walking home In the amber glow of the wintry
sunset; but my boys saw only the bright side of the tapestry, and
would have liked nothing better than to change places with little James
Speaight. To stand in the midst of Fairyland, and play beautiful tunes
on a toy fiddle, while all the people clapped their hands--what could
quite equal that? Charley began to think it was no such grand thing
to be a circus-rider, and the dazzling career of policeman had lost
something of its glamour in the eyes of Talbot.

It is my custom every night, after the children are snug in their nests
and the gas is turned down, to sit on the side of the bed and chat with
them five or ten minutes. If anything has gone wrong through the day, it
is never alluded to at this time. None but the most agreeable topics
are discussed. I make it a point that the boys shall go to sleep with
untroubled hearts. When our chat is ended, they say their prayers.
Now, among the pleas which they offer up for the several members of the
family, they frequently intrude the claims of rather curious objects for
Divine compassion. Sometimes it is the rocking-horse that has broken a
leg, sometimes it is Shem or Japhet, who has lost an arm in disembarking
from Noah's ark; Pinky and Inky, the kittens, and Bob, the dog, are
never forgotten.

So it did not surprise me at all this Saturday night when both boys
prayed God to watch over and bless the little violinist.

The next morning at the breakfast-table, when I unfolded the newspaper,
the first paragraph my eyes fell upon was this:--

     "James Speaight, the infant violinist, died in this city
     late on Saturday night. At the _matinee_ of the 'Naiad
     Queen' on the afternoon of that day, when little James
     Speaight came off the stage, after giving his usual violin
     performance, Mr. Shewell {1} noticed that he appeared
     fatigued, and asked if he felt ill. He replied that he had a
     pain in his heart, and then Mr. Shewell suggested that he
     remain away from the evening performance. He retired quite
     early, and about midnight his father heard him say,
     '_Gracious God, make room for another little child in
     Heaven._' No sound was heard after this, and his father
     spoke to him soon afterwards; he received no answer, but
     found his child dead."

     1  The stage-manager.

The printed letters grew dim and melted into each other, as I tried to
re-read them.

I glanced across the table at Charley and Talbot eating their breakfast,
with the slanted sunlight from the window turning their curls into real
gold, and I had not the heart to tell them what had happened.

Of all the prayers that floated up to heaven, that Saturday night, from
the bedsides of sorrowful men and women, or from the cots of innocent
children, what accents could have fallen more piteously and tenderly
upon the ear of a listening angel than the prayer of little James
Speaight! He knew he was dying. The faith he had learned, perhaps while
running at his mother's side, in some green English lane, came to him
then. He remembered it was Christ who said, "Suffer the little children
to come unto me;" and the beautiful prayer rose to his lips, "Gracious
God, make room for another little child in Heaven."

I folded up the newspaper silently, and throughout the day I did not
speak before the boys of the little violinist's death; but when the time
came for our customary chat in the nursery, I told the story to Charley
and Talbot. I do not think that they understood it very well, and still
less did they understand why I lingered so much longer than usual by
their bedside that Sunday night.

As I sat there in the dimly lighted room, it seemed to me that I could
hear, in the pauses of the winter wind, faintly and doubtfully somewhere
in the distance, the sound of the little violin.

Ah, that little violin!--a cherished relic now. Perhaps it plays soft,
plaintive airs all by itself, in the place where it is kept, missing the
touch of the baby fingers which used to waken it into life!






End of Project Gutenberg's The Little Violinist, by Thomas Bailey Aldrich

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE VIOLINIST ***

***** This file should be named 23355.txt or 23355.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/3/5/23355/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
