The Project Gutenberg EBook of Julia The Apostate, by Josephine Daskam

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Julia The Apostate

Author: Josephine Daskam

Release Date: November 6, 2007 [EBook #23367]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JULIA THE APOSTATE ***




Produced by David Widger






JULIA THE APOSTATE

By Josephine Daskam

Copyright, 1903, by Charles Scribner's Sons


"You don't think it's too young for me, girls?"

"Young for you--_par exemple!_ I should say not," her niece replied,
perking the quivering aigrette still more obliquely upon her aunt's
head. Carolyn used _par exemple_ as a good cook uses onion--a hint of it
in everything. There were those who said that she interpolated it in the
Litany; but Carolyn, who was born Caroline and a Baptist, was too much
impressed by the liturgy of what she called The Church to insert even an
uncanonized comma.

"Now don't touch it, Aunt Julia, for it's deliciously chic, and if you
had your way you'd flatten it down right straight in the middle--you
know you would."

Miss Trueman pursed her lips quizzically.

"I've always thought, Carrie--_lyn_," she added hastily, as her niece
scowled, "that they put things askew to make 'em different--for a
change, as you might say. Now, if they're _never_ in the middle, it's
about as tiresome, isn't it?"

Elise, whose napkin-ring bore malignant witness to her loving aunt,
Eliza Judd, laughed irrepressibly: she had more sense of humor than her
sister. It was she who, though she had assisted in polishing the old
copper kettle subsequently utilized as a holder for the tongs and
shovel, had refused to consider the yet older wash-boiler in the light
of a possible coal-scuttle, greatly to the relief of her aunt, who
blushed persistently at any mention of the hearth.

She patted the older woman encouragingly.

"That's right, Aunt Ju-ju, argue it out!" she advised.

Miss Trueman winced. She had never accustomed herself to those senseless
monosyllables that parodied her name; nor could she understand the frame
of mind that found them preferable to the comfortable "Aunt Jule" of the
old days.

"Ju-ju!" Strips of unwholesome flesh-colored paste, sugar-sprinkled,
dear to her childish heart but loathed by a maturer palate, rose to her
mind. There had been another haunting recollection: for months she
had been unable to define it perfectly, though it had always brought a
thrill of disgust with its vague appeal. One day she caught it and told
them.

"It was that dreadful creature Mr. Barnum exhibited," she declared,
"that we didn't allow the children to go to see--Jo-jo, the Dog-faced
Boy! You remember?"

Their cold horror, briefly expressed, had shown her that she had
trespassed too far on their indulgence, and she spoke of it no more, but
the memory rankled.

"It's so strange you don't see how cunning it is," Carolyn complained;
"everybody does it now. The whole Chatworth family have those names,
Aunt Ju, and it is the dearest thing to hear the old doctor call Captain
Arthur 'Ga-ga.' You know that dignified sister with the lovely silvery
hair? Well, they all call her 'Looty.' And nobody thinks of Hunter
Chatworth's real name--he's always 'Toto.'"

"And he has three children!"

Miss Trueman sighed; the constitution of the modern family amazed her
endlessly. Ga-ga, indeed!

"Do the children call him Toto, too?" she demanded, with an attempt at
sarcasm, a conversational form to which she was by nature a stranger.

"Oh, I don't know about that," Carolyn answered carelessly. "I suppose
not. Though plenty of children do, you know. Mrs. Ranger's little girl
always calls her mother Lou."

"Mrs. Ranger--you mean the woman that smokes?"

Miss Trueman's tone brought vividly to the mind a person dangling from
disgusted finger-tips a mouse or beetle.

"For heaven's sake, Aunt Jule"--in moments of intense exasperation they
reverted unconsciously to the old form--"don't speak of her as if she
smoked for a living!"

"I should rather not speak of her at all," said Miss Trueman severely.

They raised their eyebrows helplessly: Carolyn's irritation was so
unfeigned that she omitted a justly famous shrug.

For two years they had devoted an appreciable part of their busy hours
to modifying Aunt Julia's antique prejudices, developing in her the
latent aesthetic sense that their Wednesday art class taught them
existed in every one, cajoling her into a tolerance of certain phases
of modern literature considered seriously and weekly by the Monday
Afternoon Club, and incidentally utilizing her as a chaperon and
housekeeper in their modest up-town apartment.

The first six months of her sojourn had been almost entirely occupied
with accustoming herself to the absence of an attic and a cellar; long
days of depression they learned, finally, to trace to this incredible
source. Later she dealt with the problem of subsisting from eight till
one on two rolls and a cup of coffee; successfully, in the ultimate
issue, as surreptitious bits of fried ham and buckwheat cakes, with
suspicious odors, winked at discreetly by her nieces, witnessed. It
would have been unkind, as Elise suggested, to criticise Aunt Ju-ju's
performances at the ungodly hour of seven in the morning, when their own
correctly Continental repast, flanked by a chrysanthemum in a tall
vase, not only tallied so accurately with their digestive and aesthetic
necessities, but appeared, moreover, with such gratifying regularity one
hour later.

Both Carolyn and her sister had inherited from their mother, Miss
True-man's older sister, a real gift for teaching, and this, rather than
their respective abilities in art and music, enabled them to impart
very successfully the elements of these necessary branches to the young
ladies of a fashionable boarding-school just outside the city.

It was politely regretted by their friends that they were unable to
give themselves unreservedly to the exercise of their art without the
cramping necessity for teaching; but it is probable that both the girls
estimated their not too extraordinary talents very sensibly, though far
from displeased by a more flattering judgment.

Miss Trueman, who possessed the characteristic veneration of the bred
and born New Englander for his native or imported school-ma'am, resented
persistently their somewhat patronizing attitude toward the profession
second only to the ministry in her stanch respect. A little of the
simple grandeur of those childhood days when "the teacher boarded with
them" clung with the ineradicable force of habit to her mind, and she
could not understand their restive attitude at "the fine positions as
teachers Hattie's girls have got."

"I'm sure you make more money than that Miss Seymour that gets her own
meals in her room--she said so herself."

"Oh, well, there are other things to be considered, Aunt Ju; and,
anyway, she's a real bohemian, Polly Seymour. There's a fascination in
it."

"There's no fascination in being hungry that I can see, and she admitted
that, L--Elise," Miss Trueman insisted severely. "I don't understand how
she could have done it--I would have died first. And she seemed to think
it was a great joke to have her friends give her a dinner--I think it
was terrible."

"Why, Aunt Jule, how ridiculous! We were delighted to do it--it was
perfectly dear of her to let us, too. And think of the people we met
there--Rawlins and Mr. Ware! You don't mind being poor if such men will
come just out of interest in you, I tell you. Do you remember, Elise,
how Mr. Rawlins called her 'little girl'? Mr. Ware lets her use his
models whenever she likes, too," Carolyn added respectfully.

"Oh, she's bound to arrive!" Elise agreed.

Aunt Ju-ju sniffed uncontrolledly.

"I should hope she'd arrive at the point where she could buy her own
dinners," she remarked. "To be beholden for your bread"...

Here were two points of view as little likely to coincide as the
parallel lines of science, and at some such stage as this the
discussions were wont to cease.

To-day the apartment was swept and garnished for a social function
long planned by the nieces. Carnations leaned from tall glass vases,
intricate little cakes jostled carefully piled sandwiches, and a huge
brass samovar, borrowed for the occasion, gave dignity to the small
parlor. Miss Trueman had learned by now the unwritten law that prevented
the various objects in the once proudly segregated "drawing-room set"
from association with each other, and made no attempt to correct their
intentional isolation. The samovar she refused utterly to meddle with,
assuring them that she would as soon think of running a locomotive.

As the guests began to arrive Miss Trueman found herself regarding them
even more critically than usual; an argumentative spirit rose in her,
and her calm contradiction of Mrs. Ranger, who discussed with great
subtlety the notable advantages--even from the artistic point of
view--of the approaching spring when experienced in the city, in
comparison with that be-rhymed season's vaunted country beauties,
startled more than one person.

"Just because they're more delicate, just because you must look harder
to discover them, just because you must get as much from a pot of
hyacinths on the Avenue as from a whole field of primroses in the
backwoods, you know," she concluded, and the little circle nodded sagely
and congratulated themselves on an unpublished paragraph.

"I don't agree with you, Mrs. Ranger," said Aunt Ju-ju flatly, to the
absolute amazement of her nieces and the tolerant amusement of the
assembly. "I guess you haven't lived in the country much, or you
wouldn't talk so. And primroses don't grow in fields here, anyway.
If you could see my hyacinths and crocuses in round beds at home, you
wouldn't mention those poor little stalks in the pots."

Mrs. Ranger laughed, and directed her searching, level glance at
the older woman, who combined in her comely, undisguised middle age
something at once more matronly and more childish than the analytic
authoress could ever find in her own mirror.

"Aha!" she cried, "then you are no friend of dear old Horace, after all,
Miss Trueman! He and I, you see--"

The relation of these two urbanites was revealed no further, for a
bustle in the little hall drew attention to a newcomer unknown not
only to the guests but evidently to the hostesses, who rose, smiling
uncertainly, as a portly, broad-shouldered man with iron-gray hair made
his way through the group about the samovar.

"I'll have to introduce myself, I see," he began, not precisely
with what an exigent society calls ease of manner, but with a certain
practical self-possession quite as effective.

"I didn't expect the girls to remember me, but I thought perhaps you
might, Julia."

Miss Trueman peered out from the shaded five-o'clock gloom so dear to
Carolyn's soul.

"I don't seem--it's not--why, Cousin Lorando Bean, it's not you?"

"That's it," he said heartily, "that's just exactly it. And he's mighty
glad to see some of his relations again, I can tell you. And these are
Carrie and Lizzie, I suppose. Well, well, fifteen years is a long time,
even to an old fellow like me, and you girls were just beginning to be
young ladies when I left Connecticut. How are you all?"

If this simple greeting came like a breath of her native air to Miss
True-man, it cannot be said to have had a similar effect on her nieces.
Courtesy prevented a full expression of their feelings, but they
affected no undue delight at the presence of their new-found
relative--whom they had very sincerely forgotten, along with many other
details of a somewhat inartistic youth--and turned to their other guests
with a frank relief when they had established him, with a cup of tea, a
sandwich, and Aunt Julia, in the near-by dining-room.

"A third or fourth cousin, I believe, who has lived a long time in the
West," they explained. The company, some of whom doubtless possessed
third or fourth cousins from the West, nodded comprehensively, and the
interrupted function flowed smoothly on again.

Cousin Lorando Bean balanced his cup on his broad palm and gazed about
appreciatively at the casts and water-colors on the dull green walls.

"Very snug little quarters, these," he volunteered, "but, do you know,
Cousin Jule, I suppose it's all right for ladies, but I don't seem to
breathe extra well in these little rooms, somehow! I've been in two or
three of them like this, more or less, since I came to New York--people
I used to know that I've been hunting up--and, by George, I began to
feel as if I was getting red in the face, if you see what I mean."

"Yes, indeed, Cousin Lorando, I do," returned Miss Trueman eagerly, "I
see exactly. And not having any cellar--you've no idea! Nor any
attic, either. And often and often we have the gas lighted all through
breakfast. Of course there are a great many conveniences," she added
loyally, "and there's no doubt it saves steps. But I almost think I'd
rather take 'em."

He nodded.

"What's become of the old place, Cousin Jule? I judge you've been out of
it some time?"

"Two years, Cousin Lorando. The girls had been boarding up to then, and
when Aunt Martha died they got up this plan for me to come down and live
with them, for they couldn't afford it quite, alone, and then I could
chaperon them."

Aunt Julia delivered herself of this phrase with a certain complacency.
Mr. Bean looked up sharply.

"That means that nobody gets a show to abduct 'em while you're around, I
take it?" he inquired.

"We-ell, not exactly," she demurred.

"But that's the idea? I thought so. Yes. How old is Lizzie now? Thirty?"

"Oh, no, Cousin Lorando; L---- Elise isn't twenty-nine yet. Carolyn is
about thirty."

"I don't seem to recall any one chaperoning you and Hattie when you were
thirty," he suggested thoughtfully.

She laughed involuntarily.

"Oh, Hattie was married, Cousin Lorando, and the children were ten years
old! And, anyway, it was different then."

"The girls were just as pretty, I guess," he insisted. "And there were
plenty of buggies, if anybody had designs."

There was a pause, and the buzz of voices from the other room rose
loudly.

"They've neither of them got their mother's looks," he observed; and
then, with apparent irrelevance: "When will they be considered safe to
go about alone?"

"I don't know exactly what you mean," she began a little coldly, but his
laugh reassured her.

"Oh, yes, you do," he contradicted, "and don't you be getting cross at
your Cousin Lorando Bean! You know I always loved to tease you; it made
your eyes snap--and it does now."

"How can you?" She looked reproachfully at him.

"And I tell you this, Cousin Jule: neither of those girls will ever get
up a color like that!"

She shook her head, but she was not displeased. He took out a fat
chocolate-colored cigar and fingered it wistfully.

"I suppose I mustn't smoke?" he queried.

Her quick answer surprised herself.

"I should hope you could, if that woman can!"

"Which one?"

"That Mrs. Ranger, the one near the samovar--that big brass thing.
Liz--Elise didn't introduce her to you. They don't introduce people the
way they do at home, Cousin Lorando--I hope you didn't mind. They think
it's awkward."

"Oh, Lord, no, I don't mind. I can spare her, anyway. She's checked up
too high for me. But she can look you through pretty thoroughly, can't
she?"

"She writes books," Miss Trueman returned, the finality of her tone
indicating that she had explained any possible idiosyncrasy of the lady
in question.

"Oh, I see. And the little red-haired one, does she write books, too?"

"No; she's an artist. She smokes too, though. Not cigars, like yours,
but cigarettes. She's supposed to be a very good painter, but she
doesn't make what Carrie--lyn makes. The girls have very good positions
in Miss Abrams' school."

"Um, what do they get, now?"

Miss Trueman mentioned the modest sum with pride.

"And then with my money and what we get from the rent of the place--the
girls and I each have a third, you know--we do very nicely."

"So you rented the place?"

"Yes, Cousin Lorando, though I hated to. But I wouldn't sell it, though
they wanted me to. I just couldn't."

"I know."

He lighted his cigar and puffed at it in meditative silence for a
moment, while the babble from the parlor floated in with the odor of the
Ceylon tea and cigarettes.

"That's what I came about, Cousin Jule--the old place. You may think
it's queer, for I never lived there but two years once, when father and
your Uncle Joe farmed it on shares; but those two years just made it
home to me. Of course Uncle Joe wasn't any real relation of mine, and
you-all weren't my real cousins, but it was the only family I ever had,
so to say, and I loved every one of you. Then we moved back into town;
but you know I came in every week or so, and Aunt Martha used to have my
room in the attic ready for me, just the same."

"Yes, I know; Aunt Martha never forgot you, Cousin Lorando."

"Well, it's fifteen years since I saw the old place, and a lot's
happened since then, I tell you. First place, I'm a rich man, Cousin
Jule.

"Oh, I don't mean one of these multi-millionaires you have about here,
for I haven't even seven figures opposite my name; but short of that
I did very well for myself out West there, and I earned it all fair,
too--though I was pretty lucky, and that counts.

"Anyhow, never mind about that. Only I've got enough to have anything I
want, and to give my friends something, too. So as soon as I got back.
East I went straight down to the farm. But it was all shut up and a kind
of green hedge where the fence used to be, and I judged it was sold, and
I felt pretty sore about it, so I came right away."

"They only come there in June," Miss Trueman explained, "and they go
back before Thanksgiving."

"Yes. Well, I didn't know that."

He waited again for a few seconds, and Miss Trueman sat in respectful
silence till he should continue.

"You see, I'd been East once before, eight years ago, but I didn't see
the farm then," he said finally.

"I got married while I was West."

His audience of one started slightly.

"She's dead now," he added abruptly.

"Oh, Cousin Lorando--"

"You needn't bother about the sympathy, my dear, for there's none
needed. I hadn't been with her for a good while. I saw her in a
concert-hall out there, and she had curly hair and a kind of taking way
with her, and so I married her. I'd just made a big hit, and she wanted
to come to New York, and we came. We went to a big hotel, and it was
dress-suits for me and diamonds for her, and we drove in a carriage in
the park in the afternoon. She liked it, but I soon got enough. I don't
care much for that sort of thing. She wanted to go to the theatre and
see the girls that she'd been one of, you see, from the other side of
the curtain. And she saw a man there she used to know, and--well, it
turned out she liked him better, that's all."

"Oh, Cousin Lorando, how terrible--for her!"

"Um, yes. She didn't think it was specially terrible, I guess, though.
She just packed up and went."

"Went?"

"Yes--with him, you see. Diamonds and all. I got a divorce, of course.
And she wasn't such a bad lot, after all, for he hadn't any money to
speak of, compared to me. It was the man she wanted. Well, she got him."

"How awful!" Miss Trueman murmured.

"Oh, yes, I felt pretty sick for a while. But we hadn't been any too
happy before she saw him, you see. It was a big mistake. She wasn't
exactly the kind of woman you'd be apt to know, you see. So perhaps I
got off easier than I deserved. But I never would have married while she
was alive. Not but what I had a right to, you understand, but I guess
I'm old-fashioned more ways than one. I read about her death a year or
so ago. I don't believe she had any too good a time herself. She had
an awful temper. But she certainly did have pretty hair," he concluded
thoughtfully.

Miss Trueman gasped.

"So I didn't want to see New York again; I just hated the place. And
this time I only came because I found out you and the girls were here,
and you were about all there was left. People die so. And I wanted to
find out about the old place. I wanted to buy it, if I could, when I
thought it was sold."

"But, Cousin Lorando, I couldn't sell it!"

"Oh, no, I s'pose not. Still, I might buy out the girls' thirds and rent
yours, couldn't I? I'd pay you as much and more than anybody else would,
I guess. And you could keep your interest. And keep half of the house,
for that matter, to use when you wanted--it's big enough."

"Why, yes, I don't see why I couldn't do that," she said thoughtfully.
"That would be nice."

"You see, I'm willing to make any arrangement, Cousin Jule. It's about
all there is that I'm fond of now, that old place. I haven't any folks
of my own, and not a chick nor child, and I love every stick and stone
of that farm. I love the country, and I love Connecticut country best
of all, I don't care if it is rocky. You can't make farming pay in New
England any more. But I don't need to make it pay; I'm willing to pay
for the pleasure of it. And I want to do something for the town, too. I
want 'em to be glad I came to settle there. Who's got the keys?"

"I have, right here," she answered. "The furniture is all ours, you see;
they haven't brought much, only they've changed things all around. I
haven't renewed the lease yet for this year."

"Well, now, look here, Jule," Mr. Bean cried eagerly, dropping the end
of his cigar into a bonbon-dish on the little side-table, "why don't you
run right up there with me to-night, and we'll look it all over and
sort of plan it out? We can go up on the six-thirty, and get there by
half-past ten, and stop at the hotel, and be there all ready to look it
over to-morrow. Now, how's that?"

"Why, but, Cousin Lorando--I--there isn't time--I hadn't planned--"

"Lord, neither had I, but what's the difference? If you want a thing
done, go and do it yourself. Wouldn't you like to go? It's lovely
up there; the spring's coming on fast, you know. I got lots of
pussy-willow, and some little fellows told me there were May-flowers
somewhere. You'll see more grass in a minute there than you can hunt up
here in a week. Come on, Cousin Jule!"

"I believe I will!" said Miss True-man, with conviction.

"Just pack up a bag for your aunt, Carrie, while I get a cab," said Mr.
Bean from the doorway. "We're going up to the old place--I'm thinking of
buying it. I expect we'll be back tomorrow."

"Your cousin appears to be a person of decision," Mrs. Ranger suggested
to the still dazed Elise, as the cab rolled away.

"I don't understand Aunt Ju-ju at all," Carolyn interpolated crossly.
She had not been in the habit of packing her aunt's bag. "She usually
makes such a fuss about starting to go anywhere--days ahead, in fact.
And now at fifteen minutes' notice! And her best gown!"

"It makes a difference, having a man to run it," said the novelist
sagely.

When two days had passed and their aunt had not yet appeared, her nieces
were not unnecessarily alarmed, for her attachment to her old home was
great, and it required no unusual degree of imagination to picture
her delighted lingering over the old things, her purposely prolonged
transaction of business details. But four days of unexplained absence
had its effect upon their own little menage; and when a week's visit had
been accomplished and their beseeching letters had elicited only vague
postal cards explaining nothing, but suggesting their presence at the
farm, they became convinced of the necessity for action on their part,
and went, more or less in the presumable spirit of the mountain in
search of the fractious Prophet.

Tired and cross after four hours' travel on an incredibly hot 1st of
April, they walked sternly up the board walk that led to the old-style
porch, to be greeted by their cousin, who sat in snowy shirtsleeves,
tilted back in his chair against the house, smoking his fat, dark cigar.

"Welcome home, girls--glad to see you!" he called cheerily. "Here they
are, Jule! Now don't be afraid, but come right out and see them!"

"Why, bless your heart, Lorando, I'm not afraid," a familiar voice
answered; and Aunt Julia appeared before them, cool in blue checked
gingham, with an enveloping white apron and familiarly floury hands.

"I'm just beating up some biscuit for tea," she explained, "but I guess
you can shake hands with me, girls "; and as she extended both arms
hospitably they saw upon her floured left hand an unmistakable shining
gold band.

"Aunt Jule!" they gasped together. "Are you--is it--"

"That's it exactly," said Cousin Lorando Bean. "She is. And I hope
you'll congratulate her, girls, though nobody knows better than I what a
good housekeeper you've lost! I'll tell you the facts of the matter, and
you can judge for yourself. If ever two people were made for each other,
those two are your Aunt Jule and me. We love the country, and we love
this farm, and what's very important, we love the same way of living."

"That's quite true, Carrie--lyn," Aunt Julia interposed, the tears in
her eyes, but a new decision in her voice.

"I like my tea at night, and so does your Cousin Lorando. And I should
have wanted gravy on my potato if I lived to be a hundred. And, Carrie,
I _could not live_ without a cellar!

"And if you knew how nervous I got when that old dumb-waiter in the
kitchen used to whistle for the things to be put on it! I used to hate
it so--sometimes I'd wake up in the night and think I heard it! Once I
lost my temper at it, and I answered it back: 'I haven't anything to go
down, and I wouldn't give it to you if I had!'"

"Why, Aunt Jule!" they cried.

"And I tell you, Carrie, when you have cleaned house regularly, spring
and fall, for forty years, ever since you were born, it makes an awful
break to give it up! And I do love a good crayon portrait."

They looked at each other in silence.

"And when you have a set of furniture, it makes me nervous not to have
it set together," Aunt Julia went on determinedly.

"And I will _not_ have a woman smoking in my house!

"And oh, Carrie, if you knew how I suffered with that dirty darky girl!"

"But--but, Aunt Jule, why didn't you--"

"You see, Carrie and Lizzie, it was this way," said Mr. Bean soothingly.

"Your aunt and I got talking old times, and we found that we both felt
about the same. And after we'd looked the old house over together a day
or two, she couldn't seem to leave it, somehow, and she couldn't live in
it alone, and I always wanted it.

"So I said, 'If you'll just step over to the parson's, across the
street, with me, we'll fix this all right in about ten minutes. You've
known me ever since I was a boy, and I've known you, and it's nobody's
business but ours if we want to finish up together.' I may have said a
few other things, too, but that's neither here nor there. And when she
said what would the girls do, I told her that what with the full price
of their interest in the farm, and her third that she could add to
it--for a sort of wedding-present, you see--I didn't see but what you
could well afford to take a trip to Europe and stay about as long as you
liked--she said you wanted to do that more than anything; though why I
don't know--Connecticut ought to be good enough for anybody!"

They sank upon the porch steps, sincerely overcome.

"I knew you'd like it when you came to know it all," said Aunt Julia
placidly. "He's the kindest man--"

And to their excited eyes the very tidies on the geometrically arranged
chairs, the bright rag rugs on the floor, the biscuits and preserves
consecrated to their New England tea, yes, even the insistent
shirt-sleeves of Cousin Lorando Bean, were lighted by a halo of content.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Julia The Apostate, by Josephine Daskam

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JULIA THE APOSTATE ***

***** This file should be named 23367.txt or 23367.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/3/6/23367/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
