The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Courting Of Lady Jane, by Josephine Daskam

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Courting Of Lady Jane

Author: Josephine Daskam

Release Date: November 6, 2007 [EBook #23368]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COURTING OF LADY JANE ***




Produced by David Widger






THE COURTING OF LADY JANE

By Josephine Daskam

Copyright, 1903, by Charles Scribner's Sons


The colonel entered his sister's room abruptly, sat down on her bed, and
scattered a drawerful of fluffy things laid out for packing.

"You don't seem to think about my side of the matter," he said gloomily.
"What am I to do here all alone, for Heaven's sake?"

"That is so like a man," she murmured, one arm in a trunk. "Let me see:
party-boots, the children's arctics, Dick's sweater--did you think I
could live here forever, Cal?"

"Then you shouldn't have come at all. Just as I get thoroughly settled
down to flowers in the drawing-room, and rabbits in a chafing-dish, and
people for dinner, you skip off. Why don't you bring the children here?
What did you marry into the navy for, anyway? Nagasaki! I wouldn't live
in a place called Nagasaki for all that money could buy!"

"You're cross," said Mrs. Dick placidly. "Please get off that
bath-wrapper. If you don't like to live alone--Six bath-towels, Dick's
shoe-bag, my old muff (I hope and pray I'll remember that!) Helen's
reefer--Why don't you marry?"

"Marry? Marry! Are you out of your mind, Dosia? I marry!"

The colonel twisted his grayish mustache into points; a look of horror
spread over his countenance.

"Men have done it," she replied seriously, "and lived. Look at Dick."

"Look at him? But how? Who ever sees him? I've ceased to believe in him,
personally. I can't look across the Pacific. Consider my age, Dosia;
consider my pepper-and-salt hair; consider my bronchitis; consider--"

"Consider your stupidity! As to your hair, I should hate to eat a salad
dressed with that proportion of pepper. As to your age, remember you're
only ten years ahead of me, and I expect to remain thirty-eight for some
time."

"But forty-eight is centenarian to a girl of twenty-two, Dosia."

The colonel was plaiting and un-plaiting the ball-fringe of the
bed-slip; his eyes followed the motion of his fingers--he did not see
his sister's triumphant smile as she dived again into the trunk.

"That depends entirely on the girl. Take Louise Morris, for instance;
she regards you as partly entombed, probably"--the colonel winced
involuntarily--"but, on the other hand, a girl like Jane Leroy would
have no such nonsense in her head, and she can't be much more than
twenty."

"She is twenty-two," cried the unsuspecting colonel eagerly.

"Ah? I should not have said so much. Now such a girl as that, Cal,
handsome, dignified, college-bred, is just the wife for an older man.
One can't seem to see her marrying some young snip of her own age. She'd
be wasted on him. I happen to know that she refused Wilbur Vail entirely
on that ground. She admitted that he was a charming fellow, but she told
her mother he was far too young for her. And he was twenty-eight."

"Did she?" The colonel left the fringe. "But--but perhaps there were
other reasons; perhaps she didn't--"

"Oh, probably she didn't. But still, she said he was too young. That's
the way with these serious girls. Now I thought Dick was middle-aged
when I married him, and he was thirty. Jane doesn't take after her
mother; she was only nineteen when she was born--I mean, of course, when
Jane was born. Will you hand me that crocheted shawl, please?"

"My dear girl, you're not going to try to get that into that trunk, too?
Something will break."

"Not at all, my dear Clarence. Thank you. Will you send Norah up to me
as you go down?"

It had not occurred to the colonel that he was going down, but he
decided that he must have been, and departed, forgetting Norah utterly
before he had accomplished half of the staircase.

He wandered out through the broad hall, reaching down a hat absently,
and across the piazza. Then, half unconscious of direction, he crossed
the neat suburban road and strolled up the gravel path of the cottage
opposite. Mrs. Leroy was sitting in the bay-window, attaching indefinite
yards of white lace to indefinite yards of white ruffles. Jane, in cool
violet lawn, was reading aloud to her. Both looked up at his light knock
at the side door.

"But I am afraid I interrupt," he suggested politely, as he dropped
into a low chair with a manner that betokened the assurance of a warm
welcome.

"Not the least in the world," Mrs. Leroy smiled whimsically.

"Lady is reading Pater to me for the good of my soul, and I am listening
politely for the good of her manners," she answered. "But it is a little
wearing for us both, for she knows I don't understand it, and I know she
thinks me a little dishonest for pretending to."

"Mother!"

The girl's gray eyes opened wide above her cool, creamy cheeks; the
deep dimples that made her mother's face so girlish actually added a
regularity and seriousness to the daughter's soft chin. Her chestnut
hair was thick and straight, the little half-curls of the same rich tint
that fell over her mother's forehead brushed wavelessly back on each
side of a deep widow's peak.

The two older ones laughed.

"Always uncompromising, Lady Jane!" the colonel cried.

"I assure you, colonel, when Lady begins to mark iniquities, few of us
stand!"

Jane smiled gravely, as on two children. "You know very well that is
nonsense," she said.

Black Hannah appeared in the door, beaming and curtsying to the colonel.

"You-all ready foh yoh tea, Miss Lady?" she inquired.

A sudden recollection threw Mrs. Leroy into one of her irresistible fits
of gentle laughter.

"Oh, Lady," she murmured, "do you remember that impossible creature that
lectured me about Hannah's asking you for orders? Did I tell you about
it, colonel?"

Jane shook her head reprovingly.

"Now, mother dearest, you always make him out worse--"

"Worse, my darling? Worse is a word that couldn't be applied to that
man. Worse is comparative. Positive he certainly was, superlative is
mild, but comparative--never!"

"Tell about it, do," begged the guest.

"Well, he came to see how Lady was growing up--he's a sort of species of
relative--and he sat in your chair, colonel, and talked the most amazing
Fourth Reader platitudes in a deep bass voice. And when Hannah asked
Lady what her orders were for the grocer, he gave me a terrible look and
rumbled out: 'I am grieved to see, Cousin Alice, that Jennie has burst
her bounds!'

"It sounded horribly indecorous--I expected to see her in fragments on
the floor--and I fairly gasped."

"Gasped, mother? You laughed in his face!"

"Did I, dearest? It is possible." Mrs. Leroy admitted. "And when I
looked vague he explained, 'I mean that you seem to have relinquished
the reins very early, Cousin Alice!'

"'Relinquished? Relinquished?' said I. 'Why, dear me, Mr. Wadham, I
never held 'em!'"

"He only meant, mother dear, that--"

"Bless you, my child, I know what he only meant! He explained it to
me very fully. He meant that when a widow is left with a ten-year-old
child, she should apply to distant cousins to manage her and her funds."

"Disgusting beast!" the colonel exclaimed with feeling, possessing
himself of one of Hannah's beaten biscuits, and smiling as Lady Jane's
white fingers dropped just the right number of lumps in his tea.

How charming she was, how dignified, how tender to her merry little
mother, this grave, handsome girl! He saw her, in fancy, opposite him at
his table, moving so stately about his big empty house, filling it with
pretty, useless woman's things, lighting every corner with that last
touch of grace that the most faithful housekeeper could never hope to
add to his lonely life. For Theodosia had taught him that he was lonely.
He envied Dick this sister of his.

He wondered that marriage had never occurred to him before: simply it
had not. Ever since that rainy day in April, twenty years ago, when
they had buried the slender, soft-eyed little creature with his twisted
silver ring on her cold finger, he had shut that door of life; and
though it had been many years since the little ring had really bound him
to a personality long faded from his mind, he had never thought to open
the door--he had forgotten it was there.

He was not a talkative man, and, like many such, he dearly loved to be
amused and entertained by others who were in any degree attractive to
him. The picture of these two dear women adding their wit and charm and
dainty way of living to his days grew suddenly very vivid to him; he
realized that it was an unconscious counting on their continued interest
and hospitality that had made the future so comfortable for so long.

With characteristic directness he began:

"Will your Ladyship allow me a half-hour of business with the
queen-mother?"

She rose easily and stepped out through the long window to the little
side porch, then to the lawn. They watched her as she paced slowly away
from them, a tall violet figure vivid against all the green.

"She is a dear girl, isn't she?" said her mother softly.

A sudden flood of delighted pride surged through the colonel's heart.
If only he might keep them happy and contented and--and his! He never
thought of them apart: no rose and bud on one stem were more essentially
together than they.

"She is too dear for one to be satisfied forever with even our charming
neighborliness," he answered gravely. "How long have we lived 'across
the street from each other,' as they say here, Mrs. Leroy?"

She did not raise her eyes from her white ruffles.

"It is just a year this month," she said.

"We are such good friends," he continued in his gentle, reserved voice,
"that I hesitate to break into such pleasant relations, even with
the chance of making us all happier, perhaps. But I cannot resist the
temptation. Could we not make one family, we three?"

A quick, warm color flooded her cheeks and forehead. She caught her
breath; her startled eyes met his with a lightning-swift flash of
something that moved him strangely.

"What do you mean, Colonel Driscoll?" she asked, low and quickly.

"I mean, could you give me your daughter--if she--at any time--could
think it possible?"

She drew a deep breath; the color seemed blown from her transparent skin
like a flame from a lamp. For a moment her head seemed to droop; then
she sat straight and moistened her lips, her eyes fixed level ahead.

"Lady?" she whispered, and he was sure that she thought the word was
spoken in her ordinary tone. "Lady?"

"I know--I realize perfectly that it is a presumption in me--at my
age--when I think of what she deserves. Oh, we won't speak of it again
if you feel that it would be wrong!"

"No, no, it is not that," she murmured. "I--I have always known that I
must lose her; but she--one is so selfish--she is all I have, you know!"

"But you would not lose her!" he cried eagerly. "You would only share
her with me, dear Mrs. Leroy! Do you think--could she--it is possible?"

"Lady is an unusual girl," she said evenly, but with something gone out
of her warm, gay voice. "She has never cared for young people. I know
that she admires you greatly. While I cannot deny that I should prefer
less difference than lies between your ages, it would be folly in me to
fail to recognize the desirability of the connection in every other
way. Whatever her decision--and the matter rests entirely with her--my
daughter and I are honored by your proposal, Colonel Driscoll."

She might have been reading a carefully prepared address: her eyes never
wavered from the wall in front--it was as if she saw her words there.

"Then--then will you ask her?"

She stared at him now.

"You mean that you wish me to ask her to marry you?"

"Yes," he said simply. "She will feel freer in that way. You will know
as I should not, directly, if there is any chance. I can talk about it
with you more easily--somehow."

She shrugged her shoulders with a strange air of exhaustion; it was the
yielding of one too tired to argue.

"Very well," she breathed, "go now, and I will ask her. Come this
evening. You will excuse--"

She made a vague motion. The colonel pitied her tremendously in a blind
way. Was it all this to lose a daughter? How she loved her!

"Perhaps to-morrow morning," he suggested, but she shook her head
vehemently.

"No, to-night, to-night!" she cried. "Lady will know directly. Come
tonight!"

He went out a little depressed. Already a tiny cloud hung between them.
Suppose their pleasant waters had been troubled for worse than nothing?
Suddenly his case appeared hopeless to him. What folly--a man of his
years, and that fresh young creature with all her life before her! He
wondered that he could have dreamed of it; he wished the evening over
and the foolish mistake forgiven.

His sister was full of plans and dates, and her talk covered his almost
absolute silence. After dinner she retired again into packing, and he
strode through the dusk to the cottage; his had not been a training that
seeks to delay the inevitable.

The two women sat, as usual at this hour, on the porch. Their white
gowns shimmered against the dark honeysuckle-vine. He halted at the
steps and took off the old fatigue-cap he sometimes wore, standing
straight and tall before them.

Mrs. Leroy leaned back in her chair; the faintest possible gesture
indicated her daughter, who had risen and stood beside her.

"Colonel Driscoll," she said in a low, uneven voice, "my daughter wishes
me to say to you that she appreciates deeply the honor you do her, and
that if you wish it she will be your wife. She--she is sure she will be
happy."

The colonel felt his heart leap up and hit heavily against his chest.
Was it possible? A great gratitude and pride glowed softly through him.
He walked nearly up the steps and stood just below her, lifting her hand
to his lips.

"My dear, dear child," he said slowly, "you give me too much, but you
must not measure my thankfulness for the gift by my deserts. Whatever a
man can do to make you and your mother happy shall be done so long as I
live."

She smiled gravely into his eyes and bowed her head slightly; like all
her little motions, it had the effect of a graceful ceremony. Then,
slipping loose her hand, she seated herself on a low stool beside her
mother's chair, leaning against her knee. Her sweet silence charmed him.

He took his accustomed seat, and they sat quietly, while the breeze
puffed little gusts of honeysuckle across their faces. Occasional
neighbors greeted them, strolling past; the newly watered lawns all
along the street sent up a fresh turfy odor; now and then a bird chirped
drowsily. He felt deliriously intimate, peacefully at home. A fine,
subtle sense of _bien-etre_ penetrated his whole soul.

When he rose to go they had hardly exchanged a dozen words. As he held,
her hand closely, half doubting his right, she raised her face to him
simply, and he kissed her white forehead. When he bent over her mother's
hand it was as cold as stone.

Through the long pleasant weeks of the summer they talked and laughed
and drove and sailed together, a happy trio. Mrs. Leroy's listless
quiet of the first few days gave way to a brilliant, fitful gayety that
enchanted the more silent two, and the few hours when she was not with
them seemed incomplete. On his mentioning this to her one afternoon she
shot him a strange glance.

"But this is all wrong," she said abruptly. "What will you do when I am
gone in the winter?"

"What do you mean?" he asked. "Gone where, when, how?"

"My dear colonel," she said lightly, but with an obvious effort, "do
you imagine that I cannot leave you a honeymoon, in spite of my doting
parenthood? I plan to spend the latter part of the winter in New York
with friends. Perhaps by spring--"

"My dear Mrs. Leroy, how absurd! How cruel of you! What will Lady do?
What shall I do? She has never been separated from you in her life. Does
she know of this?"

"No; I shall tell her soon. As for what she will do--she will have her
husband. If that is not enough for her, she should not marry the man who
cannot--"

She stopped suddenly and controlled with great effort a rising emotion
almost too strong for her. Again a deep, inexplicable sympathy welled up
in him. He longed to comfort her, to give her everything she wanted. He
blamed himself and Jane for all the trouble they were causing her.

That afternoon she kept in her room, and he and his fiancee drank
their tea together alone. He was worried by the news of the morning,
dissatisfied out of all proportion, vexed that so sensible and natural
a proposition should leave him so uneasy and disappointed. He had
meant the smooth, quiet life to go on without a break, and now the new
relation must change everything.

He glanced at Jane, a little irritated that she should not perceive
his mood and exorcise it. But she had not her mother's marvellous
susceptibility. She drank her tea in serene silence. He made a few
haphazard remarks, hoping to lose in conversation the cloud that
threatened his evening; but she only assented tranquilly and watched the
changing colors of the early sunset.

"Have you made a vow to agree with everything I say?" he asked finally,
half laughing, half in earnest.

"Not at all," she replied placidly, "but you surely do not want an
argument?"

"Oh, no," he answered her, vexed at himself.

"What do you think of Mrs. ------'s novel?" he suggested, as the pages,
fluttering in the rising breeze, caught his attention.

"Mother is reading it, not I," she returned indifferently. "I don't care
very much for the new novels."

Involuntarily he turned as if to catch her mother's criticism of the
book: light, perhaps, but witty, and with a little tang of harmless
satire that always took his fancy. But she was not there. He sighed
impatiently; was it possible he was a little bored?

A quick step sounded on the gravel walk, a swish of skirts.

"It is Louise Morris," she said, "I'll meet her at the gate."

After a short conference she returned.

"Will you excuse me, please?" she said, quite eagerly for her. "Mother
will be down soon, anyway, I am sure. Louise's brother is back; he has
been away in the West for six years. Mother will be delighted--she was
always so fond of Jack. Louise is making a little surprise for him. He
must be quite grown up now. I'll go and tell mother."

A moment later and she was gone. Mrs. Leroy took her place in the
window, and imperceptibly under her gentle influence the cloud faded
from his horizon; he forgot the doubt of an hour ago. At her suggestion
he dined there, and found himself, as always when with his hostess, at
his best. He felt that there was no hypocrisy in her interest in his
ideas, and the ease with which he expressed them astonished him even
while he delighted in it. Why could he not talk so with Jane? It
occurred to him suddenly that it was because Jane herself talked rarely.
She was, like him, a listener, for the most part. His mind, unusually
alert and sensitive to-night, looked ahead to the happy winter evenings
he had grown to count on so, and when, with an effort, he detached
this third figure from the group to be so closely allied after
Christmas-tide--the date fixed for the wedding--he perceived that there
was a great gap in the picture, that the warmth and sparkle had suddenly
gone. All the tenderness in the world could not disguise that flash of
foresight.

He grew quiet, lost in revery. She, following his mood, spoke less and
less; and when Jane returned, late at night, escorted by a tall, bronzed
young ranchman, she found them sitting in silence in a half-light,
staring into the late September fire on the hearth.

In the month that followed an imperceptible change crept over the three.
The older woman was much alone--variable as an April day, now merry and
caressing, now sombre and withdrawn. The girl clung to her mother more
closely, sat for long minutes holding her hand, threw strange glances at
her betrothed that would have startled him, so different were they
from her old, steady regard, had not his now troubled sense of some
impalpable mist that wrapped them all grown stronger every day. He
avoided sitting alone with her, wondering sometimes at the ease
with which such tete-a-tetes were dispensed with. Then, struck with
apprehension at his seeming neglect, he spent his ingenuity in delicate
attentions toward her, courtly thoughtfulness of her tastes, beautiful
gifts that provoked from her, in turn, all the little intimacies and
tender friendliness of their earlier intercourse.

At one of these tiny crises of mutual restoration, she, sitting alone
with him in the drawing-room, suddenly raised her eyes and looked
steadily at him.

"You care for me, then, very much?" she said earnestly. "You--you would
miss--if things were different? You really count on--on--our marriage?
Are you happy?"

A great remorse rose in him. Poor child--poor, young, unknowing
creature, that, after all, was only twenty-two! She felt it, then, the
strange mist that seemed to muffle his words and actions, to hold him
back. And she had given him so much!

He took her hands and drew her to him.

"My dear, dear child," he said gently, "forgive a selfish middle-aged
bachelor if he cannot come up to the precious ideals of the sweetest
girlhood in the world! I am no more worthy of you, Lady dear, than
I have ever been, but I have never felt more tender toward you, more
sensible of all you are giving me. I cannot pretend to the wild love of
the poets you read so much; that time, if it ever was, is past for me.
I am a plain, unromantic person, who takes and leaves a great deal for
granted--I thought you knew that. But you must never doubt--" He paused
a moment, and for the first time she interrupted him nervously.

"I never will--Clarence," she said almost solemnly; and it struck him
for the first time that she had never called him by his name before. He
leaned over her, and as in one of her rare concessions she lifted her
face up to him, he bent lower than her forehead; what compelled him to
kiss her soft cheek rather than her lips he did not know.

Unexpected business summoned him to New York for a fortnight the next
day, and the great city drew him irresistibly into its noisy maelstrom.
The current of his thoughts changed absolutely. Old friends and new took
up his leisure. His affairs, as they grew more pressing, woke in him
a keen delight in the struggle with his opponents; as he shook hands
triumphantly with his lawyer after a well-earned victory he felt years
younger. He decided that he had moped too long in the country: "We must
move into town this season," he said to himself.

He fairly ran up the cottage steps in the gathering dusk. He longed to
see them, full of plans for the winter. Hannah met him at the door:
the ladies had gone to a dance at the Morrises'; there had been an
invitation for him, so he would not intrude if he followed.

Hastily changing his clothes, he walked up the street. Lights and music
poured out of the open windows of the large house; the full moon made
the grounds about it almost as bright as the rooms. He stepped up on
the piazza and looked in at the swaying couples. Lady Jane, beautiful
in pale blue mull, drifted by in her young host's arms. She was flushed
with dancing; her hair had escaped from its usual calm. He hardly
recognized her. As he looked out toward the old garden, he caught a
glimpse of a flowing white gown, a lace scarf thrown over a head whose
fine poise he could not mistake.

A young man passed him with a filmy crepe shawl he knew well. The
colonel stepped along with him.

"You are taking this to Mrs. Leroy?"

"Yes, colonel, she feels the air a little."

"Let me relieve you of it," and he walked alone into the garden with the
softly scented cobweb over his arm.

She was standing in an old neglected summer-house, her back to the door.
As he stopped behind her and laid the soft wrap over her firm white
shoulders, she turned her head with a startled prescience of his
personality, and met his eyes full. He looked straight into those soft
gray depths, and as he looked, searching for something there, he knew
not what, troubled strangely by her nearness and the helpless surrender
of her fastened gaze, a great light burst upon him.

"It is you! it is you!" he said hoarsely, and crushing her in his arms,
he kissed her heavily on her yielding mouth.

For a moment she rested against him. The music, piercingly sweet, drove
away thought. Then she drew herself back, pushing him blindly from her.

"No, no, no!" she gasped, "it is Lady! You are mad--"

"Mad?" he said quickly. "I was never sane till now. When I think of what
I had to offer that dear child, when I realize to what a farce of love
I was sacrificing her--oh, Alice dearest, you are a woman; you must have
known!"

She raised her head; an unquenchable triumph smiled at him.

"I did know!" she cried exultantly. Suddenly her whole expression
changed, her head sank again.

"Oh, Lady, my child, my baby!" she moaned, all mother now, and
brokenhearted.

"You must never tell her, never!" she panted. "You will forget; you--I
will go away--"

"It is you who are mad, Alice," he said sternly. "Listen to me. For all
these weeks it has been your voice I have remembered, your face I
have seen in imagination in my house. It is you I have missed from
us three--never Lady. It is you I have tried to please and hoped to
satisfy--not Lady. Ever since you told me you would not spend the winter
with us I have been discontented. Why, Alice, I have never kissed her in
my life--as I have kissed you."

She grew red to the tips of her little ears, and threw him a quick
glance that tingled to his fingers' ends.

"You would not have me--oh, my dear, it is not possible!" he cried.

She burst into tears. "I don't know--I don't know!" she sobbed. "It will
break her heart! I don't understand her any more; once I could tell what
she would think, but not now."

"Hush! some one is coming," he warned her, and taking her arm he drew
her out through a great gap in the side of the little house, so that
they stood hidden by it.

"Then I will tell him to his face what I think of him!" said a young
man's voice, angry, determined, but shaking with disappointment. "To
hold a girl--"

"He does not hold me--I hold myself!" It was Lady's voice, low and
trembling. "It is all my fault, Jack. I bound myself before I knew
what--what a different thing it really was. I do love him--I love him
dearly, but not--not--No, no; I don't mean what you think--or, if I do,
I must not. Jack, I have promised, don't you see? And when I thought
that perhaps he didn't care so much, and asked him--oh, I told you how
beautifully he answered me, I will never hurt him so, never!"

"It is disgusting, it is horrible; he is twenty-five years older than
you--he might be your father!" stormed the voice.

"I--I never cared for young people before!"

Could this be Lady, this shy, faltering girl? Moved by an overmastering
impulse, the man behind the summer-house turned his head and looked
through the broken wall.

Lady Jane was blushing and paling in quick succession: the waves of red
flooded over her moved face and receded like the tide at turn. Her eyes
were piteous; her hair fell low over her forehead; she looked incredibly
young.

"Of course," said the young man bitterly, "it is a good match--a fine
match, You will have a beautiful home and everything you want."

She put out her hands appealingly. "Oh, Jack, how can you hurt me so?
You know I would live with you in a garret--on the plains--"

"Then do it."

"I shall never hurt a person so terribly to whom I have freely given my
word," she said, with a touch of her old-time decision.

Colonel Driscoll felt his blood sweeping through his veins like wine. He
was far too excited for finesse, too eager--and he had been so willing
to wait, once!--for the next sweet moment when this almost tragedy
should be resolved into its elements. He strode out into the open space
in front of the little house.

"My dear young people," he said, as they stared at him in absolute
silence, "I am, I am--" He had intended to carry the matter off
jocularly, but the sight of the girl's tear-stained face and the emotion
of the minutes before had softened and awed him. His eyes seemed yet to
hold those gray ones; he felt strangely the pressure of that soft body
against his.

"Ah, my dear," he said gently, "could you not believe me when I told you
that my one wish was to make you happy as long as I lived? Happiness is
not built on mistakes, and you must forgive us if we do not always allow
youth to monopolize them.

"She has always been like a dear child to me, Mr. Morris"--he turned to
the other man--"and you would never wish me to change my regard for her,
could you know it!

"Go with him, Lady dear, and forgive me if I have ever pained
you--believe me, I am very happy to-night."

He raised her softly as she knelt before him weeping, and kissed her
hair.

"But there is nothing to forgive," he assured her.

They went away hand in hand, happy, like two dazed children for whom
the sky has suddenly but not--because they are young--too miraculously
opened, and the shrubbery swallowed them.

He turned and strode back into the shadow. Mrs. Leroy sat crouching on
the fallen timber, her head still bent. Stooping behind her, he drew her
toward him.

"They have forgotten us by now," he whispered, "can I make you forget
them?"






End of Project Gutenberg's The Courting Of Lady Jane, by Josephine Daskam

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COURTING OF LADY JANE ***

***** This file should be named 23368.txt or 23368.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/3/6/23368/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
