Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, August 31, 1880, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Harper's Young People, August 31, 1880
       An Illustrated Weekly

Author: Various

Release Date: June 13, 2009 [EBook #29115]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, AUG 31, 1880 ***




Produced by Annie McGuire








[Illustration: HARPER'S

YOUNG PEOPLE

AN ILLUSTRATED WEEKLY.]

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. I.--NO. 44. PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK. PRICE FOUR
CENTS.

Tuesday, August 31, 1880. Copyright, 1880, by HARPER & BROTHERS. $1.50
per Year, in Advance.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration]

CLAUDINE'S DOVES.

BY MRS. E. W. LATIMER.


A few days since, as I was driving in the Bois de Boulogne with a
friend, a slender, sweet young girl was pointed out to me. She was
walking beside her mother, and there was a loving, tender look in her
blue eyes, a shrinking modesty in her deportment, which interested me
at the first glance. She was apparently about fifteen. I observed to the
friend who pointed her out to me that she was fair, modest, and pretty.
"Yes," he replied, "and she is the heroine of a very pretty story."

Eight years ago her father and mother occupied an _appartement_, or
flat, in the Rue de Rivoli. Part of the Rue de Rivoli has houses only on
one side; the other is bordered by a high iron railing with gilt
spear-heads, inclosing the Garden of the Tuileries. At one point (which
was nearly opposite the house where Claudine lived) one tall pavilion of
the palace abutted on the sidewalk. The Rue de Rivoli is the most
beautiful street in Paris. The windows of the sitting-room of Claudine's
mother looked over the palace and its gardens, its chestnut-trees and
its fountains, the Seine and its quays, with a more distant view of the
Place de la Concorde and its obelisk, the Chambers of the Legislature,
and the gilded dome of the Tuileries. Every procession passed under
Claudine's windows. No little girl, I think, who lives in rooms
overlooking the Rue de Rivoli would wish to exchange them for any other
home.

Claudine's parents, though of good birth and education, were not rich;
they lived on the third story. They had only one old servant. Claudine's
mother was her daughter's nurse and governess. Till the German army
marched on Paris they had a peaceful, refined, and happy home.

At the moment of which I am about to write, the siege had ceased, and
the terrible days of the Commune were almost over. The little family
began to breathe more freely--only in a certain sense, however, for they
were all gathered together in a little close room, which would have
looked into the court-yard of their house had not its windows been
blocked up by pillows, mattresses, and furniture. They dared not look
into the street, they dared not go into their own sitting-room, for the
Versailles troops were entering Paris, bomb-shells were bursting in all
directions, and volleys of musketry were being fired round every street
corner. Paris was like a city expecting to be sacked, with the
additional horror that each man's foes might be those of his own
household.

Of a sudden they began to feel a stifling heat. Thick smoke rose all
around them. There was the sickening and suggestive smell of coal-oil in
the air. Claudine's father felt that he must know what was going on. To
look out of the windows might be death to all of them; still he ran into
the sitting-room, tore down the beds and pillows from a window, and
looked out on the Rue de Rivoli.

The palace before him was in flames. As he looked, the fire swept over
the venerable gray pile. Forked tongues of flame darted higher than the
Mansard roofs of its tall towers, and threatened the stores and
dwelling-houses across the way. Claudine's father looked below into the
street: there was no safety there. The men and women of the
neighborhood, driven from their rooms by falling fiery flakes from the
high roofs of the old palace, clustered together under shelter of the
great _porte cocheres_--by which carriages drive into the court-yards of
French houses under the rooms of the first story. Muskets, rifles, and
mitrailleuses swept the street. To venture into it seemed sure
destruction. To stay beneath their blazing roof would expose them all to
perish in the flames. Bomb-shells were falling constantly to right and
left, knocking off pieces of the cornices of lofty, stately houses,
tearing off their iron balconies, and scattering shattered fragments of
wood, window-glass, iron, and plaster on the pavement.

The father of Claudine, aghast with fear and horror, stepped back into
the sitting-room. "I see no escape for us," he cried.

At that moment hoarse shouts below them in the court-yard announced that
a party of insurgents, accompanied by a band of the fiendish women they
called _petroleuses_, had burst into the house that they inhabited.
Already the dangerous fluid from which these women took their name was
being poured over the wood-work of the staircase and the two lower
_appartements_.

A cry ran through the house of "Save yourselves!" Claudine's father
gathered together some important papers, some money, and a few jewels.
The mother and her old servant spread a blanket on the floor, and flung
into it such objects as they could gather up in haste, tying it by the
four corners. As to Claudine, frantic with terror, she ran into her
bedroom and brought out what she valued most--a cage containing two
young turtle-doves. They were her only pets. She loved them better than
anything else in the world, except old Clemence and her father and
mother.

The torches of the Communards had already set fire to the wood-work
saturated with coal-oil. Flames were breaking out in every direction.
The inhabitants of the doomed houses were forced to make their way into
the street, or stay to be burned alive. The first to rush down the
staircase was Claudine, cage in hand. She ran into the street. A
bomb-shell burst as she reached it, and her terrified parents saw her
drop upon the sidewalk, while the cage fell at some distance, rolling
away out of her hand.

When her father saw her dead, as he supposed, he rushed into the street,
undaunted by the bursting of the shell, and picking up her body,
retreated with it under shelter of the _porte cochere_.

But Claudine was not dead, nor even wounded. She had fainted with
fright, and as her parents hung over her with tender words, she opened
her blue eyes and smiled at them. A moment after, she remembered her
dear doves. Before any one could stop her or forbid her she ran back
into the street through bullets thick as hail, caught up her cage, and
ran back with her recovered treasures. A _petroleuse_ who had seen her
stopped as she was setting fire to some furniture, and cried out, with a
mocking laugh,

"What was the use of running out to pick up those? They will be roast
birds anyhow in the next half-hour."

On hearing these cruel words little Claudine began to comprehend for the
first time the greatness of the danger. She drew back, darted a look of
reproach at the vile woman who stood laughing at her trouble, and then,
with the big tears rolling down her cheeks, "God will know how to keep
them safe," she said, and opened the cage door. The doves flew out. They
poised themselves a moment; then they rose into the air, and flew away
to seek a purer sky above the clouds of smoke and sulphur. In spite of
what the cruel woman said, the doves were saved.

A few moments later a drum was heard advancing up the street. The
drummers marched at the head of a body of troops--the soldiers had
come! "_Vive l'armee!_" cried the frightened householders.

In an instant _petroleuses_, robbers, and insurgents scattered in all
directions. It is a queer sight to see a French crowd run when the
troops charge. _Now_, however, every soldier "thought on vengeance." The
incendiaries dropped fast before the iron hail.

Meantime all hands were busy putting out the flames. The fire was at
last got under. The furniture and wood-work of the first and second
stories were badly burned and broken, but the rest of the house was
saved.

Claudine and her family went back into their rooms, and let in the light
of day, the father and mother blessing God for the timely arrival of the
troops who had saved all Paris from fire and pillage. By degrees they
grew more calm. But one sad heart was inconsolable. Claudine's share in
the great catastrophe which had almost laid Paris "even with the ground"
was the loss of her dear turtle-doves.

The next morning when she came out early on the balcony to look at the
blackened ruins of the noble palace, and to mourn for her lost
favorites, she uttered a cry of joy. Her doves sat on the railing of the
balcony. They had flown back to their little mistress and their home.

"Mamma! mamma!" she cried, "God has sent me back my doves!" and her
little heart recovered the happiness that in her inexperience she
fancied had been lost forever.




JOHNNY'S SONG.

BY JOSEPHINE POLLARD.


  "Come, now, Johnny, sing me a song--
    Sing me a song," said Mabel.
  "I will," said Johnny, whose voice was strong,
    "For I'm the boy that is able."
  So he sang, and whistled, and sang again,
    Till all the woods were a-ringing,
  And Mabel frowned, and began to complain,
    "Why, Johnny, what's that you're singing?"

  "Don't you like it?" said Johnny Stout
    (Mabel her laugh must smother),
  As he straightened himself in his roundabout,
    And said, "I'll sing you another."
  He sang and whistled with might and main,
    Till Mabel's ears were a-ringing,
  And she stopped them up, and exclaimed again
    "Why, Johnny, what are you singing?"

  "That's _Pinafore_," said Johnny Stout,
    Who thought himself quite clever;
  "You've heard it often enough, no doubt."
    Said Mabel, "N--hardly ever."
  And she made up her mind that never again
    Would she ask Minnie Stout's big brother
  To sing her a song, when 'twas very plain
    He knew not one tune from another.




VIOLA'S SKETCH.

BY MRS. W. J. HAYS.


We had been staying at Dinan, a pretty and cheap little summer
resting-place in Brittany, and so picturesque were the costumes of the
peasantry that Viola, my sister, was fascinated, and her sketch-book was
getting crammed, while I, more frivolous, was longing to be in Paris,
where I could go to the Bon Marche, see the newest fashions, and hear
the latest doings and sayings of the famous actress Sarah Bernhardt.
Viola was always more sensible in some things than I, but she was weak
on jugs, and mugs, and rugs, and picturesque old rags, and old women,
and children; therefore it was no surprise to me, when we were on the
road to the railway station, and our trunks already well on the way
toward Paris, to have her insist upon stopping to find out what was the
matter with a child who was crying bitterly. When, however, Viola
discovered that the child was the grand-daughter of old Margot, who had
been our "maid-of-everything" at the little cottage which aunt had hired
for the season, who had cooked for us, and washed for us, and gone to
market for us, at some ridiculously low wages, there was no use in
arguing with her; stop she would, and alight she would from the queer
old conveyance we were in--for it was not the day for the diligence--and
aunt had to wait, nolens volens--and that means willingly if you choose,
and unwillingly if you don't choose--and I had to wait, and I had to do
all the scolding, for aunt is as meek as a turtle-dove. And after a
while both aunt and I were just as much interested as was Viola, and
there were we three all listening to little Suzette, forgetful of the
train and of Paris.

Suzette had ceased crying, and was pulling a flower to pieces as she
told us of her trouble. Margot had been obliged to remain away from home
on account of our intended departure, and she had left orders, strict
orders, for Jacques, Suzette's brother, not to do this, nor that, nor
the other--in fact, had forbidden so many things that poor little
Suzette knew not what was the thing he could do; nevertheless Jacques
insisted upon doing just as he pleased, and Suzette and he had a
quarrel. Suzette wished him to obey his grandmother; he called his
grandmother an old witch, and said Suzette was her cat, and that as for
voice and eyes, their cat had much finer ones. Then they had even worse
words, and she had pulled his hair, and he had banged the door, and said
he was going to drown himself; and he had come down to the pond, for she
had run after him, and she was sure--yes, positively sure--that her
brother was dead, and she should never see him again.

"But, Suzette," said Viola, "he may be hiding just to tease you."

"No, ma'm'selle, he has not wit enough for that; he has a tender heart,
and I was cruel to him, and of course being desolate from my unkindness,
he has effaced himself."-And then she burst out sobbing again.

"Oh, come, Viola," said I; "the child believes this to be true; let us
prove to her that it is not so. The pond is small; we will hunt high and
low for him. You take one bank, I will take the other, and between us
Jacques can not escape."

Aunt made a feeble expostulation about the train.

"The train, madame," said I, grandly, "can wait. When humanity demands
our time, there should be no thought of personal convenience. You see
this weeping girl, you hear what it is that causes her tears; how, then,
can you suggest to us the idea of evading responsibility?"

Then aunt feebly again murmured, "Dinner."

"Ah, then, ma chere tante, behold the immense luncheon Margot has
provided--good Margot, to whom we wish to render this service!" This was
from Viola; and all the while Suzette was sobbing.

"Adieu," I cried, tucking up my skirts, and running to the pond. Viola
followed me; but so lost was she in admiration of the water plants and
lilies, that had it not been for me she would have sat down and sketched
them whether Jacques drowned or not. I hurried her off, telling her the
child might be just at the last gasp, and we must hasten.

So Viola took one bank and I the other. Every other moment I shouted,
"Have you found him?"

"No-oo," came back to me.

"Neither have I," was my response.

I had a little ivory-handled riding-whip with me, and I began to beat
the bushes. Viola was now too far away to hear me, so instead of calling
to her I screamed,

"Jacques! Jacques! unless you are drowned, do answer me. Good Jacques,
dear Jacques, where are you?"

There was no reply; but the wind sighed in the trees, and the water
lapped softly on the margin of the pond. I began to have some fears of
my own. What if I should come suddenly upon the boy just as he was
sinking, the bubbles perhaps dancing up to the surface of the water?
Could I do anything to save him? could I swim? Alas! I could swim in a
bathing tank, with some one to hold up my chin. What should I do? would
my screams be heard half a mile away?

As I thought thus I again began beating the bushes, which were thick
along the edge of the water, and at the same moment a loud something,
neither a scream nor a groan, saluted my ears. I stood amazed; I could
not scream; and instantly a voice said:

"Ah, what a fine fellow I have lost! that was too bad!" and a scrubby
little head appeared above the bushes. "Is it you, ma'm'selle? I beg
pardon. I have caused you to be frightened; but you have caused me to
lose the finest frog in Brittany."

"Oh, Jacques! naughty Jacques!" I faltered, as well as my beating heart
would allow, "how could you serve us all in this way?"

"In what way, ma'm'selle?" replied the muddy creature, holding up a frog
he was in the act of skinning.

"Why, we thought--that is, we feared--or rather Suzette said, you meant
to drown yourself."

"I!" exclaimed this _gamin_, in the most innocent and artless manner.

"Yes, you. Did you not tell her so?"

"In a moment of excitement I may have uttered a careless expression,"
said the youth, peeling the frog's leg carefully. "Suzette is weak, like
all women--begging your pardon, ma'm'selle--she believes all that we men
say. She, in truth, irritated me, and I was cross. But I had promised
Monsieur le Cure that he should have a fine mess of frogs to-day, and it
was a good chance for me to get them; therefore I came to the pond, and
left Suzette to recover her composure."

I had recovered mine by this time, but I knew not whether to laugh or to
be angry; so I said, "Do you find your conscience tranquil when you
utter a falsehood?"

"Oh no, ma'm'selle, never; but this was a jest, done just to make
Suzette behave herself. She will not scold me again very soon." And with
that he strung his frogs together, slung them over his shoulder, and was
marching off.

"Come, come," said I, "you must go with me and show yourself."

"As ma'm'selle pleases," was the cool response, and we trudged back
toward the road.

[Illustration: SUZETTE.--DRAWN BY THEO. ROBINSON.]

I expected to find Suzette still sobbing, and Viola in hysterics; but
what were they doing? Suzette was posing, and Viola making a picture of
her--the cap and the sabots had been too tempting. Viola had given up
searching for the truant boy, and was trying to secure a correct sketch
of his sister. Suzette looked "all smiles" at seeing Jacques, and would
have embraced him, but Viola would not let her stir.

It is needless to say that we lost the train, that aunt mildly lectured
us, that Jacques and Suzette begged ten thousand pardons, and filled the
carriage with water-lilies. We had to stop at the cure's to return some
books he had lent us; and when we told him the story, he made us dine
with him, and I must confess that I ate some of Jacques's frog legs, and
that they were delicious.




[Begun in No. 31 of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, June 1.]

THE MORAL PIRATES.

BY W. L. ALDEN.


CHAPTER XIV.

The boys had been on their island for more than a week when they
resolved to make an excursion to Schroon, which was the nearest village,
in order to get some sugar, coffee, and other necessaries. Schroon Lake,
or rather the lower end of it, was not more than five miles from Brandt
Lake; but there was a range of high hills between the two, and the
village of Schroon was situated at the head of the lake, which was
nearly ten miles in length. A long and tiresome journey was, therefore,
before them, and they ought to have started early in the morning; but
they did not start until nearly eleven o'clock. Harry, Tom, and Joe were
to go to Schroon together, and Jim was to stay at the island until six
o'clock, when he was to row over to the west shore and bring the others
back to the camp.

[Illustration: BIDDING JIM GOOD-BY--DRAWN BY A. B. FROST.]

When they bade good-by to Jim, the three other boys assured him that
they would certainly be back as early as six o'clock, and warned him not
to fail to meet them with the boat. They then started to cross the
hills, following a foot-path that was so little used that it was hardly
visible. Unfortunately the path led through a thicket of raspberry
bushes, and the fruit was so tempting that the boys lost a good deal of
time by stopping to gather it. After a tiresome tramp under the mid-day
sun they reached the lower end of Schroon Lake, where they hired a crank
little row-boat, and rowed up to Schroon. There was a fresh northerly
breeze which delayed them; and the spray from the bow of the boat
sprinkled them, so that they were uncomfortably wet when they reached
the village. By this time they were very hungry as well as tired, and so
they went to the hotel for dinner. It was half past six o'clock when
they started to row down the lake, and several men who saw them warned
them that they were running a great risk in attempting to return at so
late an hour.

The trip down the lake was certainly a rather foolhardy one, for there
was a good deal of wind and sea, and long before they reached the
landing-place it was quite dark. But the boys were anxious to get back
to their camp, and for the first time during the cruise they acted
somewhat recklessly. However, they met with no accident; and when they
had returned the boat to its owner, they set out to cross the hills.

The path was not easy to find in the daylight, and it was next to
impossible to find it in the night. A dozen times the boys lost
themselves, and were compelled to depend entirely upon the stars to
direct their course. The woods had been all cleared away for a space of
a mile or a mile and a half wide between the two lakes, except just
along the shore of Brandt Lake; so that it was not absolutely necessary
for them to keep in the path, as it would have been had they been
passing through a thick forest. Still, it was not pleasant to lose the
path, and stumble over stones and stumps, and of course it made the
journey longer. They must have walked at least seven or eight miles on
their way back before they finally reached their own lake at midnight,
at the point where they expected to find Jim waiting for them.

Neither Jim nor the boat was there. He had waited until ten o'clock, and
then, making up his mind that they had decided to spend the night at
Schroon, he rowed back to the island, and went calmly to bed. An hour
later a dense fog settled over the lake; and when the tired boys reached
the shore they could see but a few yards in front of their eyes.

It was a terrible disappointment, but Harry tried to be cheerful. "We
shall have to stay here to-night, boys," said he; "but we will build a
good fire and keep warm." Tom said that he thought that was the best
thing to do, for without a fire they would suffer severely from the
cold, wet fog, and he asked Harry if he had any matches. Harry had none,
Joe had none, and Tom had none; so the plan of building a fire came to
nothing.

The cold gradually chilled them as they stood talking over their
adventure, and their teeth began to chatter. Joe said he wished he could
get hold of Jim for about five minutes, so that he could warm himself up
by convincing him that he ought not to have taken the boat back to the
island. Harry said nothing; but he was wondering whether he would freeze
to death in the fog, and tried to remember how travellers overtaken by
the snow on the Alps contrive to fight off the terrible drowsiness that
steals over them when they are freezing. Tom was more practical. He did
not expect to freeze in July, although he was miserably cold; and he did
not want to punish Jim for a mistake of judgment. He knew that the house
where they were accustomed to get milk was not far off, and that a boat
usually lay on the shore near the house; so he proposed to Harry and Joe
to borrow the boat, and make their way into the camp.

"If we go to that house at this time of night, we shall get shot,"
remarked Harry. "The man is an ugly-tempered chap, and I heard him say
the other day that if he ever heard anything prowling around the house
at night he always fired at it."

"Then we won't ask him for his boat: we'll borrow it without leave, and
Jim can bring it back in the morning," replied Tom.

"This is nice conduct for Moral Pirates," said Joe. "Capturing a vessel
at night is real piracy, and when Jim takes the boat back, the man will
be sure to shoot him. I'm sorry for Jim, but I hope it will be a warning
to him not to leave his friends in such a fix that they've either got to
borrow a boat without leave, or freeze."

They made their way stealthily and with great difficulty to the place
where the boat lay. It was high and dry on the beach, and though the fog
hid the house where the owner of the boat lived, the boys knew that it
was very near. They launched the boat with the utmost caution, lest any
noise should awaken the bad-tempered man with the shot-gun. They had it
almost launched, when Harry's foot slipped on a wet stone, and he fell
with a loud crash, clinging to the boat, and dragging Tom and Joe down
with him.

It was very certain that if anything could wake the owner of the boat,
he must be awake by this time; so the boys sprang up, and shoving the
boat into the water, regardless of the noise, seized the oars, and rowed
away into the fog. When they had gained what they thought was a safe
distance from the shore they ceased rowing, and congratulated themselves
that they were all right at last. To be sure, Harry had scraped his
ankle badly; Tom had forgotten the coffee, and left it on the shore; and
Joe had put the sugar in the bottom of the leaky boat, where it was
rapidly dissolving into syrup; but they were once more afloat, and
expected to reach their comfortable camp within the next twenty minutes.

There was not a particle of air stirring, and not a star was visible, so
they had absolutely nothing to steer by. They could not even hear the
sound of the water which ordinarily lapped the shore. Still, they were
not discouraged. Harry thought he knew which way the camp lay, and so he
and Tom rowed in what they imagined was the right direction.

They rowed for two hours without finding the island, and without
reaching the shore. They could not understand it. The lake seemed to
have grown in the night, and to have reached the size of Lake Ontario.
They knew that by daylight they could row across it at its widest part
in less than an hour, but now it seemed impossible to find any shore.
Joe had just suggested that they had made a mistake in coming back from
Schroon, and had walked all the way to Lake Champlain, on which they
were now rowing, when the bow of the boat struck the shore.

It was some consolation to know that the lake actually had a shore; but
they could not tell what part of the shore they had reached. They pushed
off again, and resumed their hopeless search for the camp. A new trouble
now harassed them. From seeming to have no shore at all, the lake now
seemed to have shrunk to a mere mud puddle. No matter in what direction
they rowed, they would strike the shore within ten minutes, and always
at a different place. Joe said that he had never dreamed that so much
shore and so little lake could be put together.

Toward morning Harry and Tom became too tired to row, and they lay down
in the bottom of the wet boat, and tried to keep warm by lying close to
each other. Joe took the oars, and tried to row without hitting the
shore; but he had hardly dipped his oars when the bow grated on the
pebbles. He promptly gave up the attempt, and making the boat fast to a
tree, joined Tom and Harry, and shared their misery.

They were much too cold and wretched to sleep, but they managed to keep
from growing positively stiff with cold. The sun rose, but it did not
for a long time make any impression on the fog. All at once, about seven
o'clock, the fog vanished, and the boys found themselves in a little bay
near the extreme northerly part of the lake. They had been rowing across
this little bay, first in one direction and then in another, during all
those miserable hours when they found such an unaccountable quantity of
shore.

Of course they rowed down to the camp, where they found Jim still
sleeping soundly, with a contented, happy look that was awfully
exasperating. They woke him up, and scolded him with all the strength
they had left, and then, putting on dry clothes, "turned in," and slept
all day. Jim towed the borrowed boat back, but was not shot; and the
boys afterward said that, on the whole, they were rather glad that he
still lived, and that they would mercifully forgive him.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




JED'S FIRST HALF.

BY WILLIAM O. STODDARD.


Jed was thinking.

Anybody who looked at him would have seen that much, for he was standing
all alone at the corner, leaning against the big poplar, with both hands
in his trousers pockets.

The village was one long "main street," with little short side streets
cutting across it, so that it did not have any "middle" to speak of; but
the "centre" of it and of everything else was right there before Jed's
eyes, on the steps of the grocery. It was in the shape of a stack of
boxes of fire-crackers, and Jed was gazing at it.

It had been almost cruel of old Philips, the grocer, to pile them up out
there the last week in June, to make Jed and the other boys count their
pennies and feel uncomfortable.

Fourth of July was coming, and Jed knew he would not be half ready for
it. There were five other little Pullmans, and Jed felt as if he alone
could use up "fire-crackers for six."

Think of having one of those boxes--a whole one--with nobody knew how
many packs in it!

"I'd treat every boy I know, except Prop Hooker; and mebbe I'd give him
some if he'd promise not to throw any more stones at Barlow."

The thought of such riches was a little too much for a boy of nine, and
Jed slowly sidled around the trunk of the poplar, as if he were trying
to get away, but his eyes did not turn with him. They stuck to the
crackers.

"Hullo, my little man, what's your name?"

"Jed, sir."

He had to look up, up, up, to get at the grim, weather-beaten, but not
unkindly face of the elderly farmer before him.

"Jed, eh? What's your whole name?"

"Jedediah Rittenhouse Pullman. I live down there in that yellow brick
house behind the maple-trees."

"You don't say! Why, if you'd ha' let your name drag after you, the back
end of it wouldn't but just be coming out of the front gate now. Can you
drive cows?"

"That's what I have to do every night and morning. 'Tain't everybody can
drive our brindled heifer neither."

Jed was thinking again. He had made up his mind that the stranger was a
head taller than Grandfather Pullman--in fact, that he was taller than
any other man in the world, except old Mr. Myer, the maple-sugar man,
and he had to stoop to get into his own house.

"You don't say! Well, I'm down here alone, and I've got a loaded team to
drive, and I've bought a cow, and I want a smart boy to drive her home
for me."

"How far is it?"

"Only to Topham. Little more'n twelve mile. I'll send ye home by
somebody. Pay ye well, too. Will you go?"

Jed hesitated a moment, but it was only because he seemed to be
listening to a great rattle of fire-crackers to come--a cow-load of
them.

"Course I'll go, if mother'll let me."

"We'll see her about it right away. You're just the boy I want. Give you
four shillings."

A York shilling was twelve and a half cents, and four of them made half
a dollar. Oh, what fire-works!

Mrs. Pullman met them at the door, and the first word she said was,
"Why, is that you, Deacon Giddings?"

Then Jed knew it was all right, and while his mother talked with Deacon
Giddings, he went and combed his hair, and put on his Sunday hat and a
pair of shoes and stockings.

"Jed's a tough little fellow," said his mother, "and he's used to
driving cows."

She might have said more than that for him. Even Deacon Giddings had
picked him out as the "toughest-lookin' little chap he'd seen in a long
time." The deacon was in a hurry, though, and almost before Jed began to
realize it, he was dancing around behind a very reluctant and rebellious
cow, right up the main street, with his new friend watching him from the
seat of the heavily loaded wagon.

"Ain't I glad I brought Barlow along!" said Jed to himself, again and
again. "He's a small dog, but he just knows how to bark the best kind."

Barlow was indeed a small dog, very fat and very yellow, and with less
than two inches of stubby tail, but he was keeping up a very steady
racket at the heels of the cow. He could hardly have done better if he
had been a perpetual pack of fire-crackers, going off one at a time.

Once they were out of the village and into the country road, the work
became easier, and Barlow could now and then sit down and pant awhile
before opening a fresh bark.

"You're the boy for me," said the Deacon, from the wagon. "But ain't you
afraid that dog o' yourn'll bark himself to death?"

"No, sir, he's used to it. Our brindled heifer always keeps him
barking."

"You don't say! Well, I'm glad I know your folks. What do you mean to do
with your money?"

"Fourth of July, sir."

"That's it. I declare! Well, now, I might have thought of that.
Gingerbread, nuts, candy--"

"No, sir. Fire-crackers."

"You don't say! Look out for that cow; she's heading down the road
again. Hear that dog bark! I declare!"

She was quickly headed right again, and Deacon Giddings had by no means
got to the end of the questions he wanted to ask.

They were not all about Jed's own affairs. In fact, he seemed willing to
know everything there was to be known about the Pullman family, and all
their relations, and all their neighbors.

Jed was willing enough to answer, whenever the cow would let him, and it
made the long walk in the hot sun go by faster and easier.

It was slow enough even then, and by the time they reached Penniman's
Corners, seven miles from the village, Deacon Giddings remarked, "Twelve
o'clock, I declare! Jedediah Rittenhouse Pullman, you and I and the
horses must have something to eat. The cow too, if she can stand still
long enough."

Jed had been thinking of that very thing for the last mile or two, and
he was glad enough to drive the cow into the tavern barn-yard.

Barlow stood at the gate for a minute or so after it was shut, and
barked his best. Enough to last the cow while they were getting their
dinners.

The tavern at Penniman's Corners was not so large as some there are in
London and Paris and New York, but it was a wonderful thing to Jed, and
so was the long dinner table, nearly three times as long as his mother's
biggest table at home. There must have been more than two dozen people
at that table.

"Jedediah," said the Deacon, before a great while, "you sit still. Eat
all you can. I'm going to see about something."

Jed was busy with a great ear of boiled corn, and all he could do was to
nod; but when he at last came out of the dining-room, there was news
waiting for him.

A big son of Deacon Giddings had come on horseback to meet him, and Jed
would not be needed any more, nor Barlow.

Jed's heart began to trouble him, in spite of the boiled corn.

"Oh, it's all right, Jedediah! You needn't feel bad about it. I've fixed
a night's lodgin' for ye with Widder Simmons, right across the road
there. She's to have a shillin' for it, and you can keep the other
three, and go home in the mornin'. Here they are."

That was liberal, considering that Jed had driven the cow little more
than half way to Topham, and Jed's face was bright again instantly.

The Deacon had a good deal more to say to him, but before long he, and
his son, and the loaded team, and the cow disappeared in a cloud of dust
up the north road.

For the first time in his life Jed felt lonely. The Deacon had taken him
over and introduced him to Mrs. Simmons, and nobody could be blamed for
feeling lonely in the same room with her. Jed could not remember seeing
a smile on the face of Deacon Giddings, but then he had talked, and
there was fun in him somewhere, and he had paid him his four shillings
like a man. The Widow Simmons did not talk and she did not smile, and
she looked at Jed through her silver-rimmed spectacles in a way that
made him feel more and more alone in the world every minute.

Barlow had looked in her face just once, and then he had gone out in
front of the house, and laid down in the grass.

Nearly an hour went by, or it seemed so to Jed, before he mustered
courage to say, "May I go out, ma'am, and walk around a little?"

"Hain't ye walked fur enough for one day? I wonder your mother ever let
sech a mite of a thing go a-cattle-drovin'. Well, go 'long. Only don't
you be late for supper. You won't git a bite if you be."

Jed was out of the house in a twinkling, with his hand on the pocket
which contained his four shillings.

"Barlow, come here."

It was no use to say, "Come here," for Barlow was travelling down the
home road as fast as his short legs could carry him. When he reached
what he may have thought a safe distance, he sat down and barked back.
It was his turn to say, "Come here," and Jed understood it.

"It's only seven miles home, and no cow. What's the use of my staying
here?"

It was plain enough that Jed was thinking again, and he was counting
those four bits of silver coin over and over. There would be only three
of them left if he staid all night at Mrs. Simmons's. Two packs of
crackers gone, at six and a quarter cents a pack.

"I'd have to walk home, after all, or pay for a ride, or catch on to
some wagon. No, sir! I'm going now."

He was afraid to say as much to the widow. He did not even go near the
house again.

As for Barlow, that active dog refused to even sit down another time on
the grass of Penniman's Corners.

Jed was half afraid he might be headed off and stopped by somebody. Mrs.
Simmons might come after him, and insist on his staying overnight and
paying her that shilling. Somebody else might take the other three away
from him.

It was a great trial to be travelling alone with so much money as that,
and Barlow must have felt it more or less, for he did not even bark. He
had very few chances to sit down, however, for Jed did not feel really
safe until he could see the steeple of the village church, and he walked
better than he ever had before.

He was a very tired boy when he reached the corner of his own street,
there by Mr. Philips's grocery, and he leaned up against the big poplar
for a long look at the stack of boxes of fire-crackers.

"Ain't I glad I came back! Come here, Barlow."

But Barlow was lying down, with a large job of panting to do, and he did
not come.




SOME INHABITANTS OF AFRICA.


Boys and girls who have visited menageries have probably seen an animal
shaped something like a horse, but beautifully adorned with black and
tawny stripes, standing silent and sulky in its cage. This is the zebra,
the wild horse of the great plains of Southern Africa. There it lives in
great herds, and browses on the thin grass and low shrubs of the
wilderness. It enjoys the widest liberty, and gallops and gambols
merrily with its companions through regions where the foot of man rarely
penetrates. It is not strange that when captured it refuses to be tamed,
and retains its wild nature to the end. There are, however, exceptions
to this rule. There are at present a pair of zebras in the Garden of
Plants, at Paris, which, by the constant care and kindness of their
young keeper, have gradually come to show a great affection for him, and
will even allow him to harness them to a little carriage and drive them
about the streets of Paris.

The zebra's chief weapons of defense are its lively little heels, which
it uses vigorously when attacked. It is a very wise and cunning beast,
and as its sharp ears detect the slightest rustling among the bushes, it
is very difficult to approach. The hyenas leave the zebra in peace, and
even lions and leopards rarely engage in battle with it. They are quite
content to pounce upon the sickly members of the herd which have lagged
behind their companions, and are alone and defenseless; for if any enemy
attacks a herd, the sagacious animals at once form a circle, their heads
facing the centre, and begin such a lively battery with their heels that
the attacking party is glad to save himself by flight.

The mane of the zebra is thick, but very short, and forms an upright
fringe from its forehead down the back of its neck to its body. Its skin
is striped from the tip of its nose to the end of its tail, and down its
legs to the hoof. The natives hunt it vigorously, as they prize its
beautiful skin for personal adornment, and its meat is favorite food.
They kill it with spears, or by pit-falls, in which the poor creatures
get entangled, and are easily dispatched.

Large numbers of the zebra are shot by Europeans, who are covetous of
its striped skin, while at the same time the meat gives abundant
provision to their native followers. Mr. Stanley thus describes the
killing of two of these beautiful creatures on the mountainous hunting
grounds of Kitangeh, near the east coast of Africa: "It was not until we
had walked briskly over a long stretch of tawny grass, crushed by sheer
force through a brambly jungle, and trampled down a path through clumps
of slender cane stalks, that we came at last in view of a small herd of
zebras. These animals are so quick of scent and ear, and so vigilant
with their eyes, that across an open space it is most difficult to stalk
them. But by dint of tremendous exertion I contrived to approach within
two hundred and fifty yards, taking advantage of every thin tussock of
grass, and, almost at random, fired. One of the herd leaped from the
ground, galloped a few short maddened strides, and then, on a sudden,
staggered, kneeled, trembled, and fell over, its legs kicking the air.
Its companions whinnied shrilly for their mate, and presently, wheeling
in circles with graceful motion, advanced nearer, still whinnying, until
I dropped another with a crushing ball through the head--much against my
wish, for I think zebras were created for a better purpose than to be
eaten."

The quagga and the dauw, both inhabitants of South Africa, resemble the
zebra, but are not so regularly striped nor so brilliant in coloring.
They are not so vicious in character, and are capable of being tamed.
The quagga is made useful by the settlers near the Cape of Good Hope,
and is taught to draw and to carry burdens. A settler once captured a
zebra when it was a colt. The animal accustomed itself to captivity, and
appeared so good-natured that its owner thought to make it as useful as
the quagga. As a trial, he bridled it one day and jumped on its back.
The animal at once began to rear furiously, and rushed with its rider
into a deep river. The man clung desperately to the furious little
beast, and was safely carried to the shore. But when he dismounted, the
zebra turned in a rage, and suddenly bit his ear off. After that he
concluded to remain content with his quagga team.

There are many kinds of large quadrupeds in Africa, some of which are
native to no other country. Besides the three members of the zebra
family, there is the harmless, shy giraffe, with its beautiful spotted
body, its long, slender neck, and its delicate head, which it carries
fifteen feet or more from the ground. This graceful animal is also
hunted by the natives for its soft skin and its delicate flesh, which is
considered a great dainty at a royal African feast.

[Illustration: TAKING A DRINK.]

One can imagine the peaceful life of these herbivorous animals of the
great jungles, when not disturbed by the ravages of lions and other
blood-thirsty beasts. In our engraving a pretty meeting of these
creatures is represented. A company of zebras have gathered by a marshy
pool to drink, while a huge two-horned rhinoceros, his great nose
resting on a fallen tree, looks wonderingly at these uninvited guests to
his particular swamp. Two zebras are in the water, eagerly drinking,
while the others look up at the lord of the domain as if saying, "Excuse
us, kind sir, and allow us to refresh ourselves a little, after
galloping about in the sun; we will not trample the tall reeds half as
much as you do yourself."

In the distance a crowd of shy giraffes are watching intently, as if
they too were anxious to refresh themselves with a draught of cooling
water.




[Illustration: AN ISLAND NEWSBOY.]

[Illustration: ON THE WAY TO THE ISLAND.]

[Illustration: WEIGHING THE BABY.]

[Illustration: THE MERRY-GO-ROUND.]

[Illustration: A STUDY OF BUMPS.]

[Illustration: THE PONIES.]

[Illustration: FORTUNES TOLD AND CORNS CURED.]

CONEY ISLAND SKETCHES.--DRAWN BY A. D. SHULTS.




THE UNINVITED GUEST.

BY ELLA M. BAKER.


  "Molly, put the kettle on,
  Molly, put the kettle on,
  Molly, put the kettle on--
  We'll all take tea."

Thus sang the cheerful mother of the Donald family, as she set the
kettle of potatoes over the fire to boil for breakfast. The kettle was a
tight fit for so many potatoes, and Bonny, looking on with interest from
his high chair by the fire, remarked,

"Full, mamma; ain't it?"

"Yes, laddie, full as it can hold--just like our house."

"How it spatters and boils over, mamma!"

"And our house spatters and boils over with us, too, wee one."

Sure enough the Donald dozen did live in such a small tenement that it
was a puzzle how they ever could all get packed into it at once.

But then early in the morning the father went out to his work; Alec
followed to the shop, Jeanie to the store, Nickie to sell morning
papers, some to school and some to do errands, till Bonny and the baby
would be left alone with the mother. Then, shutting the door after the
last, she would say,

"Do you see how they all boil away, Bonny?" and she would sing merrily
as she scrubbed, swept, and cooked.

She did not sing so often after father Donald fell one day and broke a
leg. Nor did she fill the kettle of potatoes as full either after that.
Mr. Donald lay helpless, and worried about the place he feared he should
lose.

"But I've worked for the house till it seems I could not work anywhere
else. If they'd only promise to let me back again when I'm able, I'd
bear the rest with an easy mind," said the sick man, getting fevered and
flushed.

"Lad, I can't have you fret so," spoke his wife at last. She took down
her bonnet and shawl. "I'll go and ask the master myself. I don't
believe he'll refuse a woman, and you such a faithful hand. Bonny is so
good he won't be any trouble to you, and I'll take the baby along."

So Bonny climbed up by the window, and watched his mother and the baby
"boil away" like the rest.

Then Bonny played by himself a long while, it seemed to him. He built a
church tower with his blocks, like the tower he could see shooting up
above the low roofs. He changed the blocks into street cars, and dragged
them up and down the window-sill. He thumbed his torn picture-books; he
thumped his rag doll. Getting tired of all, he flattened his dear little
soft nose against the pane, watching the people tramp, tramping by on
the brick sidewalks, and the carts, drays, carriages, that clamp,
clamped over the stony street. He liked this, and crooned over to
himself, contentedly, tunes that were no tunes, and words that he made
up as he went along.

But time went on, and still his mother did not come. Bonny grew hungry,
and crept down to ask papa about it. Papa was lying quiet and breathing
heavily. Bonny had fairly sung his father to sleep.

It occurred to Bonny, as he tiptoed back, that there could be no good
reason why he should not go and find his mother, or else Jeanie, or
Nickie, or Ted. Jeanie's old red cape hung in the corner; quickly he
threw it over his yellow head, and holding it fast under his chin with
one hand, he lifted the latch and stepped forth.

He walked slowly and thoughtfully off in the direction he had seen his
mother take, with short, nipping steps, like a meditative chickabiddy's.
He had not a doubt that he should come to some member of his numerous
family before long, but meanwhile he was thinking less of that than of
the sights by the way. Two boys were racing velocipedes. To Bonny that
was a splendid sight.

"I wist I had a velehorsipede," he whispered, with a pensive air.

On and on he plodded, blissfully bewildered, absorbed in these
enchanting visions, until he found himself before a caterer's show
window, tempting with crisp loaves of bread, daintily frosted cakes, and
unspeakable cookies, tarts, jellies.

"Oh my! oh my!" cried Bonny, beginning at last to remember that he was
nobody but a little hungry boy, "I'm hungry--I'm so hungry!"

While he stared with all his longing eyes, he heard these words spoken
loudly right by his side, "Come on, then; we shall be sure of a good
dinner."

Bonny turned round. Two men in tall black hats were striding by, and
one, as he spoke, clapped the other on the shoulder. The invitation was
not meant for Bonny at all. But that did not make any difference to him.
He simply received the idea that if he followed these two men he should
get to a dinner. So he pressed sturdily after them. He had to walk fast,
and sometimes he almost lost sight of them in the throng. But Bonny was
so hungry by this time that he was very much in earnest. He did not stop
to watch the people, nor to look into any more shop windows.

It was really not long before the two tall hats were seen turning up
some low, broad steps. The panting Bonny, tugging after, followed
unnoticed through a wide door into a vast hall, all paved with marble.
Quite confused and out of breath, Bonny suddenly stood still. Where he
had lost sight of the two tall hats and the wearers of them he did not
know.

"Seems like another out-doors," the child thought, looking up at the
high ceiling; "but where's the dinner? There is a dinner; I smell it; it
smells good. Seems to me I never did smell so much dinner in my life."

By this time he also became aware of a cheerful clatter of dishes and
voices; and following the sound across the wide hall, he pushed open a
great door that stood half ajar.

Sure enough, there before him lay table after table, adorned with
spotless linen, and spread temptingly not only with flowers and fruit,
but with plenty to eat.

How should little Bonny know that this was the day when the grand new
Metropolis Hotel first opened to the public? How should he know that
here were all the mighty men of the city--merchants, editors, ministers
even--with their wives, met together by invitation to celebrate the
dedication dinner? You see, they had not invited Bonny: nobody expected
him; so at first nobody noticed him as he slipped noiselessly in.

The tables seemed so full of people that Bonny had to walk up the room
to find a place. A queer hush fell on the clatter and the chatter.
People dropped their forks. They watched this little figure with the
sunny hair, the happy face, the shabby shoes, the tumbled check apron,
that dragged after it the well-nigh forgotten red cape, and at last
mounting into an empty chair, said, with a sigh of satisfaction, and in
a very clear voice, "I want dinner, please."

Bonny glanced round him. He thought everybody looked pleased, and
catching the eye of a lady who bent toward him, he smiled back a shy,
friendly smile.

This lady was the first to speak to him. She crossed eagerly over and
said, "May I sit beside you, dear? I knew a little boy once with yellow
hair like yours."

Bonny never noticed that she had tears in her soft eyes now.

"I like your hair best," he answered, half timidly, half frankly. The
lady's hair was very dark, and she wore in it a splendid yellow flower.

"But, please, I am so hungry! May I have dinner?"

Before the lady could answer, a stout gentleman came hurrying up.

"Well, well, let's see about this," he began, in a rollicking tone.
"Shake hands, little stranger. So you came to my dinner, did you?"

Bonny dropped his head. He was rather afraid of the loud-voiced man; but
the lady whom he was not afraid of said, re-assuringly, "This is the man
who gives the dinner, little one; this is his house; he'll be very good
to you, never fear."

So Bonny looked up then, and replied, simply, "I came; I was hungry, and
I came."

The host cleared his throat, and said, heartily, while he patted Bonny's
curls, "Well, I didn't expect you, that's a fact; but we'll give you
just as good a dinner, for all that. A dinner?--I'll warrant you we
will: and upon my word, ladies and gentlemen, I rather think the
Metropolis Hotel is honored to have the chance."

Never, never had Bonny imagined such a dinner as he ate that day. The
lady who sat by his side cut up the chicken, and helped him choose among
the lavish dainties that the host kept insisting on having brought for
him to taste.

Hungry? It seemed to Bonny that he never in this world could be hungry
again.

His innocent heart ran over, and he told his new friend, the lady, all
she asked him about his sick father, his tired mother, the little
tenement that was like the kettle that all boiled away, and the big
family that crammed it so full when gathered together. But one thing
neither the lady, nor her husband, who filled Bonny's pocket with
pennies, nor the host, could succeed in finding out from him.

This was where the little fellow belonged, and how to return him to his
home.

Street and number he knew naught about. What was his name? "Bonny
Laddie." His father's name? "Oh, John." What kind of work did his father
do? "Oh, nothing; father is sick." He had no clear ideas associated with
any calling except with Nickie's, as they found by questioning.

That Nickie peddled papers, and that Bonny would when he was bigger, he
was very positive about.

"Well, then," suggested the host, "we'll try the newsboys. We'll just
have Laddie standing by the door when they go past, and maybe he can
pick out this brother of his from the lot."

The company sat for a long time round the tables. Bonny kept still,
listening and wondering, though he understood little of the speeches and
the toasts. Once all eyes were again turned toward Bonny.

A gentleman rose and said, "Ladies and gentlemen, I beg to propose the
health of the first guest of the Metropolis Hotel, who, though
uninvited, has given the patriarch of this palace the privilege of
entertaining an angel unawares."

But Bonny answered nothing to the looks bent upon him. With one hand
full of nuts and bonbons, the other in his heavy pocket, and a face of
perfect peace, the little guest of the Metropolis Hotel lay fast asleep
in his chair.

He was rosily awake again by the time the newsboys were crying their
evening papers.

"Come and watch for Nickie," coaxed the host; and with Bonny's small,
warm hand in his own he stepped out on the broad granite slab in front
of the hotel.

"That isn't Nickie--nor that--nor that," Bonny kept saying at first.
"Oh, Nickie!" he shouted, suddenly; and plunging forth into the street,
tumbled against a small boy in big trousers and an overgrown cap, whose
bundle of papers looked much fatter than he did.

Astonished Nickie, who had not been home since morning, could scarcely
believe his senses at first, as he stared at his little brother through
the dusk, the fog, and the rain-drops that now began to fall. However,
he could answer all the questions that Laddie had been unable to
satisfy, and in a very short interval a carriage had been summoned, the
host had stowed away in it a capacious basket hastily filled with choice
remnants from the feast, and Bonny Laddie was rolling toward his home in
charge of the gentle stranger lady and her husband.

Was there ever in the most agitated of kettles such bubbling and boiling
over as took place inside the crowded Donald tenement that night? Had
not they all been breaking their loving, anxious hearts about Bonny
Laddie, and lo! here he was, safe in the old red cape, smiling and
shining as usual, and rather mystified at having such a fuss made over
him.

The stranger lady, promising Bonny to come again, made haste to go away,
but before going she had time to wonder at something she saw. Why did
Bonny's tired but blithe-looking mother give the lady's husband such a
sad, almost fearful, look? Why did he seem confused, and going over to
the sick man, say, "I will reconsider that matter, John. You may rest
easy"?

Afterward she understood. When John's master had that afternoon curtly
refused Mrs. Donald's petition, and let her go away disappointed and
distressed, her patient waiting and her earnest pleading having been in
vain, he had considered himself right, from the stand-point of his own
interest. But then he had known nothing of the clean, crowded household,
and nothing of this yellow-haired laddie who reminded him of another
little yellow-haired laddie who had been taken from him.




[Begun in HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE No. 37, July 13.]

THE STORY OF THE AMERICAN NAVY.

BY BENSON J. LOSSING.


CHAPTER VIII.

After an almost uneventful cruise, excepting the capture of the British
war schooner _Pictou_, and a chase by two British frigates, the gallant
and "lucky" _Constitution_ remained in Boston eight or nine months. Late
in December, 1814, she sailed from Boston for the Bay of Biscay, in
command of Captain Charles Stewart, equipped with fifty-two guns and
fully manned. She cruised for a while off the port of Lisbon and further
southward; and late in February, 1815, she met, fought, and conquered
the English frigate _Cyane_ and her consort the _Levant_. The battle
occurred in the night--the moon shining brightly. For fifteen minutes
the three vessels kept up an incessant cannonade, and the moon was
obscured by a dense cloud of smoke. By superior seamanship as well as
gunnery, Stewart vanquished both his antagonists, while the
_Constitution_ was only slightly injured.

Stewart sailed with his prizes to Port Praya, Cape de Verde Islands. The
next day three large British vessels were dimly seen in a fog
approaching. The _Constitution_ slipped out of the harbor under cover of
the mist, followed by her prizes. The English vessels gave chase, but
Stewart, by expert seamanship, saved his own ship and the _Cyane_ from
capture, but the _Levant_ was overtaken and caught. This was the final
cruise of the _Constitution_ in the war of 1812-15, for peace had been
proclaimed before this victory was achieved. "Old Ironsides" was ever
afterward revered by the American people, and she is yet afloat in the
service.

In 1814 Lake Champlain as well as Lake Ontario was a theatre of valiant
deeds. In September a land and naval force invaded New York from Canada.
The Americans had created a little navy on Lake Champlain to oppose the
British, and placed it in charge of Commodore Macdonough. The hostile
fleets met in Plattsburg Bay, and while a sharp conflict was raging
between the land forces, a severe naval battle was fought on the lake.
The British Commodore (Downie) was killed, and Macdonough achieved a
brilliant victory, for which he was honored by citizens and by Congress.
Meanwhile, Chauncey and Sir James L. Yeo were manoeuvring for the
control of Lake Ontario without coming to any very serious blows.

In the summer of 1814 some new vessels were added to the navy. In June
the frigate _Guerriere_ was launched at Philadelphia in the presence of
50,000 people. In August the _Java_ was launched at Baltimore before
20,000 spectators. The public and private vessels were very active.
Indeed, the story of the cruises of some of the privateers at this time
might be made as exciting as any tale of fiction.

The _Wasp_, Captain Blakeley, made a successful cruise southward,
vanquishing the _Reindeer_, _Avon_, and _Atlanta_. She was lost at sea
in October, 1814, and was never heard of afterward. Captain Warrington
cruised in the _Peacock_ in the spring of 1814. He captured the
_Epervier_, a most valuable prize. In May he crossed the Atlantic to the
Bay of Biscay, captured fourteen merchant vessels, and returned to New
York. At the same time Barney was very active with a flotilla of
gun-boats on the waters of Chesapeake Bay, and in August, having
destroyed his vessels to keep them from the British, he and his men
assisted in the battle of Bladensburg.

At the beginning of 1815, Decatur was in command of a small squadron at
New York. The _President_ was his flag-ship. With her alone he sailed
out of New York Harbor on a dark night, eluded the blockading fleet, and
at dawn the next morning was chased by four British vessels. The
_President_ was deeply laden for a long cruise. One of her pursuers (the
_Endymion_) overtook her, when a sharp action began. The two frigates
ran side by side before the wind for two hours in a running fight,
during which the _Endymion_ was so crippled that she was about to strike
her colors. At that moment the other pursuers came up, and the
_President_ was captured, not by a single vessel, but by a squadron.

The other vessels of Decatur's squadron, ignorant of the fate of the
_President_, sailed for an appointed gathering-place in the South
Atlantic Ocean. Captain Biddle, in the _Hornet_, captured the _Penguin_
in March, after a conflict which called forth the highest praises for
the American commander. Afterward, while the _Hornet_ and _Peacock_ were
sailing together, they were chased by the _Cornwallis_, a British 74.
They escaped, and the _Peacock_, continuing her cruise eastward,
captured the _Nautilus_ in the Straits of Sunda, the last vessel
captured in the war.

The American privateers made such havoc among English shipping that the
mercantile community were dismayed. "One of these sea-devils," said a
London newspaper, "is seldom caught; but they impudently defy the
English privateers and heavy 74's. Only think--thirteen guineas for one
hundred pounds were paid to insure a vessel across the Irish Channel!"
They had captured or destroyed during the war about sixteen hundred
British merchant vessels of all classes. Our little navy had produced a
wonderful change in public opinion in Europe concerning the resources
and power of the United States. It had achieved the independence of the
Republic.

In time of peace our navy has been employed in the beneficent work of
giving aid to commerce; in making explorations of strange seas; in
scientific investigations of ocean phenomena; and in the important
operations of the Coast Survey, begun in 1817. The most conspicuous of
the peaceful performances of our navy were known respectively as the
"South Sea Exploring Expedition" and the "Japan Diplomatic Expedition."
The former began in 1838, and ended in 1842. It was composed of six
government vessels, furnished with a complete corps of scientific men,
and was commanded by Lieutenant Charles Wilkes. It went southward until
it reached pack ice, in south latitude 66 deg., and made a voyage of
about ninety thousand miles.

[Illustration: COMMODORE PERRY'S SHIPS IN THE BAY OF JEDDO.]

The Japan Diplomatic Expedition consisted of a squadron of seven
vessels, commanded by Commodore M. G. Perry. Its business was to carry a
letter to the Emperor of Japan from the President of the United States,
who asked him to open his sea-ports to American commerce. The expedition
sailed in the fall of 1852, and reached Japan in 1853. Perry was met on
the bosom of the bay of Jeddo, in which his squadron had anchored, by
high officials in the Emperor's state barges, and to them the object of
the expedition was made known. The Japanese were astonished, for they
had never seen a steam-ship. After several months' consideration the
Emperor agreed to the President's request, and in 1860 he sent an
embassy to the United States. Ever since then there has been free
intercourse between the two nations.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




"I AM THE LAD THAT FOLLOWS THE PLOUGH."

BY MARY A. BARR.


[Illustration]

  I am the lad that follows the plough--
    Robin and Thrush just whistle for me--
  In a hickory suit that's pretty well worn
  I go to the field at early morn,
  I help to scatter the golden corn--
    Robin and Thrush just whistle for me.

  Out in the meadows and woods and lanes--
    Robin and Thrush just whistle for me--
  I watch the sheep and the lambs at play;
  When the grass is high I toss the hay;
  There isn't a boy in the world so gay--
    Robin and Thrush just whistle for me.

  I go with father to shear the sheep--
    Robin and Thrush just whistle for me--
  I fodder the cattle, the mangers fill,
  I drive a team, I go to the mill,
  I milk the cows with a right good will--
    Robin and Thrush just whistle for me.

  I help the peaches and plums to save--
    Robin and Thrush just whistle for me--
  For I am the boy can climb a tree;
  There isn't an apple too high for me,
  There isn't a nut that I can't see--
    Robin and Thrush just whistle for me.

  When I am a man I'll own a farm--
    Robin and Thrush just whistle for me--
  Horses and sheep and many a cow,
  Stacks of wheat, and a barley mow;
  I'll be a farmer and follow the plough:
    Robin and Thrush shall whistle for me.

  'Tis better to stand in the golden corn--
    Robin and Thrush just whistle for me--
  To toss the hay on the breezy lea,
  To pluck the fruit on the orchard tree,
  Than roam about on the restless sea:
    So, sailor-boy, I'll follow the plough.

  'Tis better to hear the wild birds sing,
    Robin and Thrush on the apple bough--
  'Tis better to have a farm and a wife,
  And lead a busy, peaceable life,
  Than march to the noisy drum and fife:
    So, soldier-boy, I'll follow the plough.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: OUR POST-OFFICE BOX.]


  NEW YORK CITY.

     In HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE No. 12 I read about some curious South
     American spiders that kill birds, and the other day I read in an
     English paper an account by Mr. Frank Buckland of an enormous
     spider which is kept in a glass case in the London Zoological
     Gardens, and I thought the little readers of YOUNG PEOPLE might be
     interested to know about it. This spider, says Mr. Buckland, came
     from South America. He is about as large as a common house-sparrow
     with its wings folded, and when he spreads his legs he is a
     terrible-looking fellow. The whole of his body is covered with
     dark red-brown hair. He eats cockroaches, and spins threads to
     catch them. He will also kill and suck the blood of young mice
     when they are given to him. Such a gigantic creature could very
     easily capture and kill humming-birds. On page 648 you will find a
     picture of this terrible bird-eating spider.

     It is evident that Shakspeare knew of the great strength of
     certain spiders. In _Measure for Measure_ the Duke says:

  "How may likeness, made in crimes,
  Making practice on the times,
  Draw with idle spiders' strings
  Most pond'rous and substantial things!"

     These large spiders are very common in Cuba, as well as in South
     America, and are probably found in all tropical countries. In Cuba
     lives the big hairy tarantula. Its home is a hole in the ground,
     and boys often amuse themselves by running pieces of sweet-flag in
     the hole. The tarantula is fond of sucking the juice of this
     plant, and will immediately fasten itself to the root, when the
     boys pull it out and examine the curious creature. There is in
     Cuba a large flat-bodied spider that lives in trees, and wages
     terrible warfare on young birds. It is a very common sight in
     Cuban forests to see these creatures, their long legs grasping a
     young bird which they have entangled in their strong web, as a
     devil-fish grasps its prey, and busily engaged in sucking the
     blood of their helpless victim.

  R. R.

       *       *       *       *       *

  SAN ANTONIO, TEXAS.

     We had two mocking-birds, but we were tired of them, and let them
     fly away. At night they came back for something to eat, so mamma
     left the cages out, and the next day they went in their cages
     again.

     I am eleven years old. I like YOUNG PEOPLE very much.

  MAUD T.

       *       *       *       *       *

  MOLINE, ILLINOIS.

     I live on the Mississippi River, which is over a mile wide here. I
     am thirteen years old, and a reader of YOUNG PEOPLE. I think "The
     Moral Pirates" is the best story of all.

     Two of my companions, Frank and Rob, had read the story; so we
     made up our minds that instead of cruising we would camp out for a
     week. Frank's father owned a large row-boat, which he said we
     might take, and I took my tent and dog. We laid in enough
     provisions to last a month.

     So after a good deal of trouble we got started. We landed about
     three miles from here, on the other side of the river. It was a
     splendid place to camp. The ground was sandy, and was hemmed in by
     trees. The first night passed well enough. The next morning Frank
     and I rowed across the river for milk. As we were nearing camp on
     our way back, a large steamboat nearly ran us down. The swell
     nearly capsized us, and as it was, we got pretty wet.

     We concluded that we could not stand that sort of thing, and made
     up our minds to start for home the next day, where we arrived to
     be well laughed at.

  ED.

       *       *       *       *       *

  CHICAGO, ILLINOIS.

     In HARPER'S MAGAZINE for June, 1873, page 181, it is stated that
     Betsy Griscom, who was employed to make the first national
     standard of the United States, suggested that a five-pointed star
     be used, and showed how a paper could be folded so that the star
     could be produced by a single cut of the scissors. Can you tell me
     how it was done?

  WILLIAM H. O.

Do any of our young readers know Betsy Griscom's secret? Let us see who
will send the neatest method for making a five-pointed star with one cut
of the scissors.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BALTIMORE, MARYLAND.

     I am a reader of YOUNG PEOPLE. It is a grand paper for boys. Can
     any one tell me where I can get a few silk-worms? I am anxious to
     make some silk, and see the worms work.

  CLARENCE L.

In HARPER'S MAGAZINE for April, 1870, there is an interesting
illustrated paper on silk-worms, which will give you much information.
No doubt some of our young readers can tell you where you can obtain
worms. You will find it easy to take care of them, but a little
difficult to make the silk thread, unless you know how to spin, which is
not probable. An old lady in a New England country town once had a
desire for silk-worms. She procured a number, which she fed on the
leaves of a mulberry-tree which grew in her yard. As during her youth
she had been taught to spin, she unwound her cocoons, and made beautiful
silk thread, with which she knitted elegant silk stockings as gifts to
her friends. If you are successful in procuring worms, observe their
habits carefully, and write about them to the Post-office Box of YOUNG
PEOPLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

  CUSSETA, ALABAMA.

     I am a little Southern boy. I have three brothers younger than
     myself. I am afraid we are not always as good as we should be.
     Last fall Ben and I ran away, and went with some negroes to pick
     cotton. When we came home at noon we found mamma crying because
     she thought we had been stolen, and papa hunting for us. When
     mamma got through with us we decided not to run away any more. We
     hunt hickory-nuts and chestnuts in the fall.

     Success to YOUNG PEOPLE!

  GEORGE B.

       *       *       *       *       *

The two following letters are from very youthful readers, who print
their communications with a pencil:

  PEARL CREEK, NEW YORK.

     I thought I would write to you. My brother has a snapping-turtle,
     and a white rabbit with brownish spots on it, and my brother and I
     have three kittens. I like YOUNG PEOPLE very much, and I like the
     story of "The Moral Pirates."

  EDITH M. P.

       *       *       *       *       *

  ATLANTA, GEORGIA.

     I am five years old. I can not read yet, but I get my sister to
     read the stories in YOUNG PEOPLE. I like them better than any I
     ever heard. My letter is getting 'most too long.

  ELLEN H.

       *       *       *       *       *

  JERSEY CITY HEIGHTS, NEW JERSEY.

     A short time ago, fresh from the country, I was walking along
     Cortlandt Street, New York city, when I dimly heard the familiar
     "Bob White" whistled. "Papa, there's a quail," I exclaimed.
     "Nonsense," replied papa, laughing; "your imagination is lively."
     "But," I answered, "I really heard one." "They don't have quails
     in the city," said papa; "perhaps some boy or man is imitating the
     bird." I said no more until right at our elbow the shrill notes
     "Bob White" startled us both. Papa stopped, exclaiming, "That is a
     quail, surely." We looked about us, but could see no cage. "That
     is strange," said papa. Then we looked closer, and saw in a wire
     inclosure, extended from a cellar window to the sidewalk, an
     unused basin of an old fountain, filled with plants, while half
     concealed beneath the foliage were two plump birds, one of which
     extended his little head and saluted us with familiar notes again.
     A little crowd soon gathered, and listened with pleasure to the
     sweet notes of these feathered beauties, which here in the very
     centre of the business activities and bustle of the metropolis
     recalled recollections of woods and rural delights.

  EDDIE A. L.

       *       *       *       *       *

  HARPERSFIELD, OHIO.

     I am a lame boy. I have hip-disease. One limb is shorter than the
     other, and I use crutches or a cane. I mean to be a doctor, and
     make hip-disease a specialty. Grandpa has promised me a nice
     carriage and harness, and my uncle says he will give me a nice
     horse when I grow up and get to be a doctor. I am eleven years old
     now. I must tell you how much I like YOUNG PEOPLE, especially the
     beautiful pictures.

  FREDDIE G. C.

       *       *       *       *       *

  MARENGO, IOWA.

     I like YOUNG PEOPLE very much. I have a great many dolls, and I
     feel very sorry for poor Jane, who fell in the water, but more
     sorry for her dear mamma, Fanny. I am glad that Dora and Bessie
     rescued Jane. I should like to know whether they ever found her
     curls when the tide went down.

  JESSIE LEE R.

       *       *       *       *       *

  EAGLE GROVE, IOWA.

     I like YOUNG PEOPLE better than any other paper we take. I am
     twelve years old. I have been to school three terms without being
     absent or tardy once. I would like to be a school-teacher when I
     am old enough.

     I tried Edith L.'s recipe for cream-candy, and I thought it very
     nice.

     There are a great many wild flowers here, both in the woods and on
     the prairies.

     My brothers have been busy harvesting, but they always find time
     to read YOUNG PEOPLE.

  MARY E. P.

       *       *       *       *       *

  NIAGARA FALLS, NEW YORK.

     I am so much interested to read of the pets that are often written
     about in the Post-office Box that I thought the other children
     might feel the same interest in mine. I have two kittens--a white
     one named Julius Caesar, and a gray one named Spitz, because it
     spits at everybody who comes near it. I also have three little
     chickens named Bud, Blossom, and Cherry. They have no mother, and
     I am bringing them up by hand. They run after me every time I go
     near their box, and sometimes they seem to think Julius Caesar is
     their mother, and they try to cuddle in his fur.

  CARL E. T.

       *       *       *       *       *

  HOUSTON, TEXAS.

     My papa takes YOUNG PEOPLE for me, and I am so happy when it
     comes. Every Saturday, when papa gets off from the street car, I
     run out to meet him, and I say, "Papa, have you got HARPER'S YOUNG
     PEOPLE?"

     I have a pet pigeon with a red breast, a pussy, and a little brown
     calf. I had two beautiful chickens, but they died. I am seven
     years old.

  LOTTIE S.

       *       *       *       *       *

  MONA LAKE, MICHIGAN.

     My home is at Allegan, but now we are staying at this beautiful
     lake. It is only a station on the Grand Haven Railroad, and nobody
     lives here except the station-master and one or two others,
     besides those who are camping out. Most of the people live in
     tents, but we live in a house.

     I think Mona Lake is a beautiful place. There are picnics here
     almost every day. The chief attractions are boating, fishing,
     bathing, and the well of mineral water, which is said to be very
     fine. The lake itself is about seven miles long, and where we live
     it is about a quarter of a mile wide. It was named after my sister
     Mona, who was named after Castle Mona, in the Isle of Man. Papa
     has the American flag on a flag-staff on our house, and the Manx
     flag, with the three legs, on a pole set in the ground.

     Pickerel, bass, cat-fish, sunfish, and perch are caught here. Pa
     caught a cat-fish that weighed fifteen pounds.

     There are two camps here now. They are called "Kat-fish Kamp" and
     "Camp Toodle La." The last one is named after a song they sing
     here a good deal. It begins,

  "Gentleman frog lived in the spring,
      Toodle la! toodle la!"

  EDDIE S. C. M.


       *       *       *       *       *

  FOND DU LAC, WISCONSIN.

     I have taken YOUNG PEOPLE from the first number, and I like it
     very much. I think the Post-office Box is splendid. I have read
     the letter from Jennie Anderson, and should like to hear more
     about her home in India.

     We have three canaries, and one of them is almost as old as I am.
     I am fourteen.

  EMMA K. G.

       *       *       *       *       *

  NEW ORLEANS, LOUISIANA.

     I have four dolls. Their names are Bertha, Fanny, Juliette, and
     Rosy. Bertha has beautiful black hair, and Fanny has golden hair.

     I, too, go very often to Spanish Fort. We had a little canary. It
     was a beautiful singer. But one day my aunt left the door open
     when she cleaned the cage, and it flew away, and never has been
     found. I am ten years old, and I have been to England, France, and
     Germany.

  LOUISA D.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I would like to exchange postage stamps with any correspondent of
     YOUNG PEOPLE.

  WILLIE H. SCHERZER,
  523 Arch Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I am collecting different kinds of seeds, and I would like to
     exchange with any correspondents of your valuable paper. I have
     verbenas, forget-me-nots, four-o'clocks (red, white, and yellow),
     cypress, tropaeolum, and other kinds.

  C. D. K.,
  490 Fifth Street, Louisville, Kentucky.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I will exchange postage stamps with any foreign readers of YOUNG
     PEOPLE. I have several rare stamps.

  E. M. VAN CLEVE,
  Hillsborough, Highland County, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *

     HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE is a splendid paper. I would advise every
     one to take it.

     I would like to exchange birds' eggs with some correspondent. To
     any one sending me ten eggs I will send ten in return.

  J. F. WELLS,
  Ingersoll, Ontario, Canada.

       *       *       *       *       *

A CONSTANT READER.--During early colonial times both Indians and negroes
were held as slaves in Massachusetts, and advertisements of negroes for
sale were common in the Boston _News Letter_ and other publications of
the day. Ship-loads of fresh importations of negroes were constantly
arriving from the African coast. Meanwhile the feeling against slavery
was steadily gaining ground, and much public discussion on the subject
took place. The exact date of the abolition of slavery in Massachusetts
is a disputed point, but it is generally conceded to have legally taken
place at the time of the adoption of the State Constitution in 1780,
although advertisements of slave property for sale appear in the
newspapers of a later date. In 1788 the Legislature of Massachusetts
passed an act to prevent the slave-trade, inflicting a heavy fine upon
any citizen of the commonwealth who should import, transport, buy, or
sell any of the inhabitants of Africa as slaves, or fit out vessels to
be employed in the traffic.

Public feeling was for a long time hostile to the negro race, and during
the early part of the present century "blacks" were repeatedly warned to
depart out of the commonwealth, the pretext being to avoid the increase
of a pauper population, "which threatened to become both injurious and
burdensome."

       *       *       *       *       *

C. S. M.--About what animal do you desire to know the habits? You left
your sentence unfinished.

       *       *       *       *       *

ALICE P.--Turtles prefer bits of meat and insects to bread-crumbs. If
you read former numbers of Our Post-office Box carefully, you will find
directions for feeding all kinds of turtles.

       *       *       *       *       *

CAMILLE B.--The poem by your little sick friend is very pretty, but we
can not make room for it.

       *       *       *       *       *

PEARL A. H.--Your story is very pretty, but comes too late for
publication.--You must send to the address of the advertiser for the
catalogue you wish.

       *       *       *       *       *

J. L. TOPPIN.--Directions for building a canvas canoe were given in
YOUNG PEOPLE No. 26. There is an interesting paper entitled "The
Cruising Canoe and its Outfit" in HARPER'S MAGAZINE for August, 1880,
which will also give you much useful information.

       *       *       *       *       *

Favors are acknowledged from Charles G. R., William Mullen, "Mars,"
Edwin J. Prindle, W. Clarence J., Louis H., John R. Glen, Nellie, Mary
and Cora Wright, Katie and K. T., Etta G. D., Fannie E. C., T. Ellis,
Susie A. M., Camilla A. M., Louise S., Mary Hartwell, Ivy Hamilton.

       *       *       *       *       *

Correct answers to puzzles are received from "Evening Star," Samuel R.
Hayter, K. T. W., F. B. W., Nettie and Lottie Marshall, Camille Benson,
Charles L. Hupf, "Buttercup," Eddie A. Leet, Mary E. N., Gracie Kelley,
John Brooke, Willie Hargest, Clara Jaquith, T. J. Anderson, Minnie H.
Ingham, M. P. Martin, W. S. Dodge, Mattie P., Etta M. Gilbreath, Wilfrid
H. Warner, Edward L. Hunt, "Western Star," Charles Stewart.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUZZLES FROM YOUNG CONTRIBUTORS.

No. 1.

ENIGMA.

  My first is in vein, but not in hand.
  My second is in waist, but not in band.
  My third is in queer, but not in funny.
  My fourth is in sugar, but not in honey.
  My fifth is in train, but not in car.
  My sixth is in moon, but not in star.
  My seventh is in wheat, but not in rye.
  My eighth is in cunning, but not in sly.
  A tribe am I whose home is found
  Where snow lies deep on the frozen ground.

  W. G.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 2.

WORD SQUARE.

First, a stalk. Second, an ancient vestment. Third, a river in Bohemia.
Fourth, a sign.

  GEORGE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 3.

GEOGRAPHICAL DOUBLE ACROSTIC.

A city in New York State. Mountains in Asia. A river in Asia. A city in
China. A lake in the United States. Answer--Two rivers in Europe.

  LEON.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 4.

DECAPITATION.

  Entire I'm found in every home; but if you once behead,
  I may be white, I may be black, I may be brown or red.
  Behead again, and all at once invisible am I;
  You can not grasp me, yet without me you would surely die.

  JENNIE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 5.

DIAMOND.

In market. A fruit. An article useful in drawing. A number. In grapes.

  H. AND W.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 6.

NUMERICAL CHARADES.

  1. A beautiful flower composed of 8 letters.
  My 4, 8, 5, 6 is a part of the face.
  My 2, 3, 4, 1, 7 is a vessel.

  FANNIE.

  2. A river in the Northern United States composed of 12 letters.
  My 6, 8, 3, 1 is an alkali.
  My 9, 11, 4, 3 is to encircle.
  My 7, 5, 10 is a part of a certain kind of wheel.
  My 1, 12, 2 is a cape in the Northern United States.

  ARTHUR.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANSWERS TO PUZZLES IN NO. 41.

No. 1.

Magpie, Parrot.

No. 2.

  H    a    M
  E    l    I
  L   on    G
  I chneumo N
  O   hi    O
  T    i    N
  R   hin   E
  O cciden  T
  P    i    T
  E   as    E

Heliotrope, Mignonette.

No. 3.

Full fathom five thy father lies.

No. 4.

      H
    B O A
  H O R S E
    A S K
      E

No. 5.

Miles Standish.

No. 6.

Aristotle.

HISTORICAL ANECDOTE.

If the blanks in the Historical Anecdote published in No. 41 of the
YOUNG PEOPLE are filled by the following words in the order in which
they are given, the story will be complete:

  _Richard Coeur de Lion._
  _Richard I._
  _England._
  _Henry II._
  _Crusade._
  _Palestine._
  _1191._
  _Philip Augustus._
  _France._
  _Holy Land._
  _Philip Augustus._
  _Richard._
  _Leopold._
  _Austria._
  _St. Jean d'Acre._
  _England._
  _Richard._
  _Leopold._
  _Henry VI._
  _Germany._
  _Richard._
  _Austria._
  _Leopold's._
  _Richard._
  _Henry VI._
  _John Lackland._
  _England._
  _Richard._
  _Blondel._
  _England._
  _Henry VI._
  _Eighteen._




ADVERTISEMENTS.




HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE.

HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE will be issued every Tuesday, and may be had at
the following rates--_payable in advance, postage free_:

  SINGLE COPIES                     $0.04
  ONE SUBSCRIPTION, _one year_       1.50
  FIVE SUBSCRIPTIONS, _one year_     7.00

Subscriptions may begin with any Number. When no time is specified, it
will be understood that the subscriber desires to commence with the
Number issued after the receipt of order.

Remittances should be made by POST-OFFICE MONEY ORDER or DRAFT, to avoid
risk of loss.

ADVERTISING.

The extent and character of the circulation of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE
will render it a first-class medium for advertising. A limited number of
approved advertisements will be inserted on two inside pages at 75 cents
per line.

  Address
  HARPER & BROTHERS,
  Franklin Square, N. Y.




CLAVERACK COLLEGE

AND HUDSON RIVER INSTITUTE, at Claverack, N. Y., three miles from Hudson
and eight from Catskill. One of the most successful and largest boarding
schools in the country. Fits Boys thoroughly for college. Full College
Course for Women. Art, Languages and Music, specialties. 14 instructors;
10 departments. 102d year opens September 6. Pupils eight years and
upward received. Terms greatly reduced. Personal care in primary.
Address, for Catalogue and terms in different departments that will meet
the wants of every one.

REV. ALONZO FLACK, Ph.D., President.




Harper's New and Enlarged Catalogue.

With a COMPLETE ANALYTICAL INDEX, and a VISITORS' GUIDE TO THEIR
ESTABLISHMENT,

Sent by mail on receipt of Nine Cents.

HARPER & BROTHERS, FRANKLIN SQUARE, N. Y.




COLUMBIA BICYCLE.

[Illustration]

No boy can be thoroughly happy who is not the owner of a bicycle. The
art of riding is easily acquired, and, once learned, is never forgotten.
A horse cannot compare with the bicycle for speed and endurance. The
sport is very fascinating, and the exercise is recommended by physicians
as a great promoter of health. Send 3-cent stamp for 24-page Illustrated
Catalogue, with price-lists and full information.

  The POPE MFG. CO.,
  79 Summer Street,
  Boston, Mass.




CHILDREN'S

PICTURE-BOOKS.

     Square 4to, about 300 pages each, beautifully printed on Tinted
     Paper, embellished with many Illustrations, bound in Cloth, $1.50
     per volume.

The Children's Picture-Book of Sagacity of Animals.

     With Sixty Illustrations by HARRISON WEIR.

The Children's Bible Picture-Book.

     With Eighty Illustrations, from Designs by STEINLE, OVERBECK,
     VEIT, SCHNORR, &c.

The Children's Picture Fable-Book.

     Containing One Hundred and Sixty Fables. With Sixty Illustrations
     by HARRISON WEIR.

The Children's Picture-Book of Birds.

     With Sixty-one Illustrations by W. HARVEY.

The Children's Picture-Book of Quadrupeds and other Mammalia.

     With Sixty-one Illustrations by W. HARVEY.

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.

_Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any part of the United States, on
receipt of the price._




OUR CHILDREN'S SONGS.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our Children's Songs. Illustrated. 8vo, Ornamental Cover, $1.00.

       *       *       *       *       *

This is a large collection of songs for the nursery, for childhood, for
boys and for girls, and sacred songs for all. The range of subjects is a
wide one, and the book is handsomely illustrated.--_Philadelphia
Ledger._

Songs for the nursery, songs for childhood, for girlhood, boyhood,
and sacred songs--the whole melody of childhood and youth bound in
one cover. Full of lovely pictures; sweet mother and baby faces;
charming bits of scenery, and the dear old Bible story-telling
pictures.--_Churchman_, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.

HARPER & BROTHERS _will send the above work by mail, postage prepaid, to
any part of the United States, on receipt of the price_.




[Illustration: THE BIRD-EATING SPIDER.--[SEE PAGE 646.]]




[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

SOLUTION OF RAJAH PUZZLE.


With the scissors cut from _A_ to _B_ in Fig. 1, and arrange the parts
as in Fig. 2.




[Illustration]

THE SQUARE PUZZLE.


Answer to the Square Puzzle given in No. 41 of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE.




A MUSICAL ANECDOTE.


[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration: ADELE (_who has seized a favorable opportunity of trying
Aunty's friz on Baby_). "There, now, keep still till I see how you'll
look when you're older."]





End of Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, August 31, 1880, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, AUG 31, 1880 ***

***** This file should be named 29115.txt or 29115.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/1/1/29115/

Produced by Annie McGuire

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
