The Project Gutenberg EBook of Told by the Northmen:, by
E. M. [Ethel Mary] Wilmot-Buxton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Told by the Northmen:
       Stories from the Eddas and Sagas

Author: E. M. [Ethel Mary] Wilmot-Buxton

Release Date: July 30, 2009 [EBook #29551]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TOLD BY THE NORTHMEN: ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Suzanne Shell, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








                        TOLD BY THE NORTHMEN:

                   Stories from the Eddas and Sagas



                         E. M. WILMOT-BUXTON




                 George G. Harrap & Co. Ltd., London

                                 1908

       *       *       *       *       *




                        Contents


          Hakon's Lay                                            ix

  CHAPTER

     I.   How All Things Began                                    1

    II.   How All-Father Odin Became Wise                         6

   III.   How the Queen of the Sky Gave Gifts to Men             14

    IV.   How a Giant Built a Fortress for the Asas              17

     V.   The Magic Mead                                         22

    VI.   How Loki Made a Wager with the Dwarfs                  29

   VII.   The Apples of Youth                                    34

  VIII.   How the Fenris Wolf was Chained                        41

    IX.   How the Pride of Thor was Brought Low                  46

     X.   How Thor's Hammer was Lost and Found                   56

    XI.   The Giant's Daughters                                  64

   XII.   The Story of Balder the Beautiful                      69

  XIII.   How Hermod Made a Journey to the Underworld            78

   XIV.   How Loki was Punished at Last                          83

    XV.   The Story of the Magic Sword                           87

   XVI.   How Sigmund Fought His Last Battle                     96

  XVII.   The Story of the Magic Gold                           101

 XVIII.   How Sigurd Slew the Dragon                            107

   XIX.   How Sigurd Won the Hand of Brunhild                   114

    XX.   How the Curse of the Gold is Fulfilled                116

   XXI.   The Boyhood of Frithiof the Bold                      123

  XXII.   Frithiof and Ingeborg                                 127

 XXIII.   Frithiof Braves the Storm                             131

  XXIV.   Balder Forgives                                       134

   XXV.   How the End of All Things Came About                  140

          Pronouncing Index of Proper Names                     145

       *       *       *       *       *




Hakon's Lay

_By James Russell Lowell_


    "O Skald, sing now an olden song,
    Such as our fathers heard who led great lives;
    And, as the bravest on a shield is borne
    Along the waving host that shouts him king,
    So rode their thrones upon the thronging seas!"

    Then the old man arose: white-haired he stood,
    White-bearded, and with eyes that looked afar
    From their still region of perpetual snow,
    Over the little smokes and stirs of men:
    His head was bowed with gathered flakes of years,
    As winter bends the sea-foreboding pine,
    But something triumphed in his brow and eye,
    Which whoso saw it, could not see and crouch:
    Loud rang the emptied beakers as he mused,
    Brooding his eyried thoughts; then, as an eagle
    Circles smooth-winged above the wind-vexed woods,
    So wheeled his soul into the air of song
    High o'er the stormy hall; and thus he sang:

    "The fletcher for his arrow-shaft picks out
    Wood closest-grained, long-seasoned, straight as light;
    And, from a quiver full of such as these,
    The wary bow-man, matched against his peers,
    Long doubting, singles yet once more the best.
    Who is it that can make such shafts as Fate?
    What archer of his arrows is so choice,
    Or hits the white so surely? They are men,
    The chosen of her quiver; nor for her
    Will every reed suffice, or cross-grained stick
    At random from life's vulgar fagot plucked:
    Such answer household ends; but she will have
    Souls straight and clear, of toughest fibre, sound
    Down to the heart of heat; from these she strips
    All needless stuff, all sapwood; hardens them,
    From circumstance untoward feathers plucks
    Crumpled and cheap, and barbs with iron will:
    The hour that passes is her quiver-boy;
    When she draws bow, 'tis not across the wind,
    Nor 'gainst the sun, her haste-snatched arrow sings,
    For sun and wind have plighted faith to her:
    Ere men have heard the sinew twang, behold,
    In the butt's heart her trembling messenger!

    "The song is old and simple that I sing:
    Good were the days of yore, when men were tried
    By ring of shields, as now by ring of gold;
    But, while the gods are left, and hearts of men,
    And the free ocean, still the days are good;
    Through the broad Earth roams Opportunity
    And knocks at every door of hut or hall,
    Until she finds the brave soul that she wants."

    He ceased, and instantly the frothy tide
    Of interrupted wassail roared along.




TOLD BY THE NORTHMEN:

CHAPTER I

How All Things Began

_This is the tale which the Northmen tell
concerning the Beginning of Things._


Once upon a time, before ever this world was made, there was neither
earth nor sea, nor air, nor light, but only a great yawning gulf, full
of twilight, where these things should be.

To the north of this gulf lay the Home of Mist, a dark and dreary
land, out of which flowed a river of water from a spring that never
ran dry. As the water in its onward course met the bitter blasts of
wind from the yawning gulf, it hardened into great blocks of ice,
which rolled far down into the abyss with a thunderous roar and piled
themselves one on another until they formed mountains of glistening
ice.

South of this gulf lay the Home of Fire, a land of burning heat,
guarded by a giant with a flaming sword which, as he flashed it to and
fro before the entrance, sent forth showers of sparks. And these
sparks fell upon the ice-blocks and partly melted them, so that they
sent up clouds of steam; and these again were frozen into hoar-frost,
which filled all the space that was left in the midst of the mountains
of ice.

Then one day, when the gulf was full to the very top, this great mass
of frosty rime, warmed by the flames from the Home of Fire and frozen
by the cold airs from the Home of Mist, came to life and became the
Giant Ymir, with a living, moving body and cruel heart of ice.

Now there was as yet no tree, nor grass, nor anything that would serve
for food, in this gloomy abyss. But when the Giant Ymir began to grope
around for something to satisfy his hunger, he heard a sound as of
some animal chewing the cud; and there among the ice-hills he saw a
gigantic cow, from whose udder flowed four great streams of milk, and
with this his craving was easily stilled.

But the cow was hungry also, and began to lick the salt off the blocks
of ice by which she was surrounded. And presently, as she went on
licking with her strong, rough tongue, a head of hair pushed itself
through the melting ice. Still the cow went on licking, until she had
at last melted all the icy covering and there stood fully revealed the
frame of a mighty man.

Ymir looked with eyes of hatred at this being, born of snow and ice,
for somehow he knew that his heart was warm and kind, and that he and
his sons would always be the enemies of the evil race of the Frost
Giants.

So, indeed, it came to pass. For from the sons of Ymir came a race of
giants whose pleasure was to work evil on the earth; and from the Sons
of the Iceman sprang the race of the gods, chief of whom was Odin,
Father of All Things that ever were made; and Odin and his brothers
began at once to war against the wicked Frost Giants, and most of all
against the cold-hearted Ymir, whom in the end they slew.

Now when, after a hard fight, the Giant Ymir was slain, such a river
of blood flowed forth from his wounds that it drowned all the rest of
the Frost Giants save one, who escaped in a boat, with only his wife
on board, and sailed away to the edge of the world. And from him
sprang all the new race of Frost Giants, who at every opportunity
issued from their land of twilight and desolation to harm the gods in
their abode of bliss.

Now when the giants had been thus driven out, All-Father Odin set to
work with his brothers to make the earth, the sea, and the sky; and
these they fashioned out of the great body of the Giant Ymir.

Out of his flesh they formed Midgard, the earth, which lay in the
centre of the gulf; and all round it they planted his eyebrows to make
a high fence which should defend it from the race of giants.

With his bones they made the lofty hills, with his teeth the cliffs,
and his thick curly hair took root and became trees, bushes, and the
green grass.

With his blood they made the ocean, and his great skull, poised aloft,
became the arching sky. Just below this they scattered his brains, and
made of them the heavy grey clouds that lie between earth and heaven.

The sky itself was held in place by four strong dwarfs, who support it
on their broad shoulders as they stand east and west and south and
north.

The next thing was to give light to the new-made world. So the gods
caught sparks from the Home of Fire and set them in the sky for stars;
and they took the living flame and made of it the sun and moon, which
they placed in chariots of gold, and harnessed to them beautiful
horses, with flowing manes of gold and silver. Before the horses of
the sun, they placed a mighty shield to protect them from its hot
rays; but the swift moon steeds needed no such protection from its
gentle heat.

And now all was ready save that there was no one to drive the horses
of the sun and moon. This task was given to Mani and Sol, the
beautiful son and daughter of a giant; and these fair charioteers
drive their fleet steeds along the paths marked out by the gods, and
not only give light to the earth but mark out months and days for the
sons of men.

Then All-Father Odin called forth Night, the gloomy daughter of the
cold-hearted giant folk, and set her to drive the dark chariot drawn
by the black horse, Frosty-Mane, from whose long wavy hair the drops
of dew and hoar-frost fall upon the earth below. After her drove her
radiant son, Day, with his white steed Shining-Mane, from whom the
bright beams of daylight shine forth to gladden the hearts of men.

But the wicked giants were very angry when they saw all these good
things; and they set in the sky two hungry wolves, that the fierce,
grey creatures might for ever pursue the sun and moon, and devour
them, and so bring all things to an end. Sometimes, indeed, or so say
the men of the North, the grey wolves almost succeed in swallowing sun
or moon; and then the earth children make such an uproar that the
fierce beasts drop their prey in fear. And the sun and moon flee more
rapidly than before, still pursued by the hungry monsters.

One day, so runs the tale, as Mani, the Man in the Moon, was hastening
on his course, he gazed upon the earth and saw two beautiful little
children, a boy and a girl, carrying between them a pail of water.
They looked very tired and sleepy, and indeed they were, for a cruel
giant made them fetch and carry water all night long, when they should
have been in bed. So Mani put out a long, long arm and snatched up
the children and set them in the moon, pail and all; and there you can
see them on any moonlit night for yourself.

But that happened a long time after the beginning of things; for as
yet there was no man or woman or child upon the earth.

And now that this pleasant Midgard was made, the gods determined to
satisfy their desire for an abode where they might rest and enjoy
themselves in their hours of ease.

They chose a suitable place far above the earth, on the other side of
the great river which flowed from the Home of Mist where the giants
dwelt, and here they made for their abode Asgard, wherein they dwelt
in peace and happiness, and from whence they could look down upon the
sons of men.

From Asgard to Midgard they built a beautiful bridge of many colours,
to which men gave the name of Rainbow Bridge, and up and down which
the gods could pass on their journeys to and from the earth.

Here in Asgard stood the mighty forge where the gods fashioned their
weapons wherewith they fought the giants, and the tools wherewith they
built their palaces of gold and silver.

Meantime, no human creature lived upon the earth, and the giants dared
not cross its borders for fear of the gods. But one of them, clad in
eagles' plumes, always sat at the north side of Midgard, and, whenever
he raised his arms and let them fall again, an icy blast rushed forth
from the Mist Home and nipped all the pleasant things of earth with
its cruel breath. In due time the earth was no longer without life,
for the ground brought forth thousands of tiny creatures, which
crawled about and showed signs of great intelligence. And when the
gods examined these little people closely, they found that they were
of two kinds.

Some were ugly, misshapen, and cunning-faced, with great heads, small
bodies, long arms and feet. These they called Trolls or Dwarfs or
Gnomes, and sent them to live underground, threatening to turn them
into stone should they appear in the daytime. And this is why the
trolls spend all their time in the hidden parts of the earth, digging
for gold and silver and precious stones, and hiding their spoil away
in secret holes and corners. Sometimes they blow their tiny fires and
set to work to make all kinds of wonderful things from this buried
treasure; and that is what they are doing when, if one listens very
hard on the mountains and hills of the Northland, a sound of
tap-tap-tapping is heard far underneath the ground.

The other small earth creatures were very fair and light and slender,
kindly of heart, and full of goodwill. These the gods called Fairies
or Elves, and gave to them a charming place called Elfland in which to
dwell. Elfland lies between Asgard and Midgard, and since all fairies
have wings they can easily flit down to the earth to play with the
butterflies, teach the young birds to sing, water the flowers, or
dance in the moonlight round a fairy ring.

Last of all, the gods made a man and woman to dwell in fair Midgard;
and this is the manner of their creation.

All-Father Odin was walking with his brothers in Midgard where, by the
seashore, they found growing two trees, an ash and an elm. Odin took
these trees and breathed on them, whereupon a wonderful transformation
took place. Where the trees had stood, there were a living man and
woman, but they were stupid, pale, and speechless, until Hoenir, the
god of Light, touched their fore-heads and gave them sense and wisdom;
and Loki, the Fire-god, smoothed their faces, giving them bright
colour and warm blood, and the power to speak and see and hear. It
only remained that they should be named, and they were called Ask and
Embla, the names of the trees from which they had been formed. From
these two people sprang all the race of men which lives upon this
earth.

And now All-Father Odin completed his work by planting the Tree of
Life.

This immense tree had its roots in Asgard and Midgard and the Mist
Land; and it grew to such a marvellous height that the highest bough,
the Bough of Peace, hung over the Hall of Odin on the heights of
Asgard; and the other branches overshadowed both Midgard and the Mist
Land. On the top of the Peace Bough was perched a mighty eagle, and
ever a falcon sat between his eyes, and kept watch on all that
happened in the world below, that he might tell to Odin what he saw.

Heidrun, the goat of Odin, who supplied the heavenly mead, browsed on
the leaves of this wonderful tree, and from them fed also the four
mighty stags from whose horns honey-dew dropped on to the earth
beneath and supplied water for all the rivers of Midgard.

The leaves of the Tree of Life were ever green and fair, despite the
dragon which, aided by countless serpents, gnawed perpetually at its
roots, in order that they might kill the Tree of Life and thus bring
about the destruction of the gods.

Up and down the branches of the tree scampered the squirrel, Ratatosk,
a malicious little creature, whose one amusement it was to make
mischief by repeating to the eagle the rude remarks of the dragon, and
to the dragon those of the eagle, in the hope that one day he might
see them in actual conflict.

Near the roots of the Tree of life is a sacred well of sweet water
from which the three Weird Sisters, who know all that shall come to
pass, sprinkle the tree and keep it fresh and green. And the water, as
it trickles down from the leaves, falls as drops of honey on the
earth, and the bees take it for their food.

Close to this sacred well is the Council Hall of the gods, to which
every morning they rode, over the Rainbow Bridge, to hold converse
together.

And this is the end of the tale of How All Things began.




CHAPTER II

How All-Father Odin Became Wise

_These are the tales which the Northmen tell
concerning the wisdom of All-Father Odin._


On the highest hill of Asgard, upon a great chair, sat All-Father
Odin, watching from thence all that was happening on and above and
under the earth.

The Father of Asas and of men had long grey locks and thick curling
beard, and he wore a great blue coat flecked with grey like unto the
sky when the fleecy clouds scud across it.

In his hand he carried a spear, so sacred that, if anyone swore an
oath upon its point, that oath could never be broken.

On his head he wore, when sitting upon his watch-tower throne, a
helmet shaped like an eagle; but when he wandered, as he loved to do,
about the earth, he wore a large broad-brimmed hat drawn low over his
forehead.

Perched on his broad shoulders sat two inky-black ravens, Hugin and
Munin, whom every morning he sent to wing their flight about the world
that they might see what was going on.

Every evening when they returned, they whispered all that they had
seen and heard in his ears.

At Odin's feet crouched two great wolves, whom he fed from the meat
set before him; for he himself cared not to eat flesh-food, and
preferred rather to drink the sacred mead provided by the goat who fed
upon the leaves of the Tree of Life.

Sometimes Odin left his watch-tower throne for the great Council Hall
where the twelve Asas sat and took counsel together; but his favourite
seat of all was in his own palace of Valhalla, or the Hall of the
Chosen Slain. This palace stood in the midst of a wonderful grove of
trees, whose leaves were all of red gold, rustling and shimmering in
the breeze. Five and forty doors opened into it, each wide enough to
allow eight hundred warriors to enter abreast, and over the chief
entrance was a boar's head and a great eagle, whose keen gaze looked
forth over all the world. The walls of the palace were built of spears
of polished steel, so bright that they lighted the whole building; and
the roof was made of golden shields.

    "And wondrous gleamed Valhalla on the heights,--
    Her walls shone bright as rows of glittering spears;
    The roof resplendent like great golden shields;
    Hundreds of open gates and welcoming doors
    For myriad warriors from the fields of earth,--
    The chosen heroes of the future years,
    To be great Odin's mighty bodyguard
    Against the awful prophecies of doom."

From end to end of the great hall stood long tables and benches loaded
with armour, ready prepared for the fortunate guests. And this was the
manner of their selection. Whenever a great battle was about to be
fought on the earth, Odin sent forth the nine Valkyrs, or Battle
Maidens, his especial attendants, to watch the progress of the fight
and to choose from the fallen warriors half of their number. These the
Battle Maidens carried on their swift steeds over the Rainbow Bridge
into the great hall of Valhalla, where they were welcomed by the sons
of Odin and taken to the All-Father's throne to receive his
greeting. But if one had shown himself especially heroic in the fight,
Odin would descend from his throne and advance to the door to bid him
welcome.

And now, seated at the long tables, loaded with great beakers of mead
and dishes of boar flesh, the warriors feasted merrily, tended by the
fair Battle Maidens.

                  "The blazing roof resounds
    The genial uproar of those shades who fall
    In desperate fight, or by some brave attempt."

When they had eaten all they could, the warriors would call for their
weapons, ride out into the great courtyard, and there wage desperate
fights, in the course of which many a man would be sorely wounded. But
this mattered little, for at the sound of the dinner horn all wounds
were healed.

    "And all day long they there are hacked and hewn
    'Mid dust, and groans, and limbs lopped off, and blood
    But all at night return to Odin's hall
    Woundless and fresh; such lot is theirs in heaven."

These warriors were Odin's special joy and delight, and he was never
weary of watching them at feast or in the combat. Sometimes, indeed,
when some battle on earth was impending, he would appear, riding upon
his eight-footed grey horse, and with white shield on arm would fling
his glittering spear into the ranks of the warriors as signal for the
fight to begin, and would rush into the fray with his war-cry, "Odin
has you all!"

Now, though all this shows very clearly that All-Father Odin was a
warlike Asa and delighted in battles, there was another side to his
character, for beyond all the other Asas he cared for wisdom.

Very early in the morn of time All-Father Odin discovered that beneath
the roots of the Tree of Life, just where sky and ocean met, there was
a marvellous spring of water, "the fountain of all wit and wisdom."
Looking into its crystal depths, all that was going to happen in the
future was revealed, and anyone drinking of it received the gifts of
wisdom, knowledge, and right judgment about all things. Now this
spring was guarded by the Giant Mimir, who prided himself upon being
wiser than any other giants or Asas could be, for he alone had the
right to draw water from the well; and every morning, dipping his
glittering horn therein, he drank a long draught, and with every
draught he grew wiser, till he knew everything that was past and
present and is to come.

When Odin became aware of the marvellous properties of the spring, he
was eager to drink of it, "for," said he, "it is not fitting that a
giant should know more than the Father of Asas and men."

So early one morn he entered a dark grove of trees, where, amidst
great arching roots fantastically intertwined, bubbled the spring; and
keeping watch beside it sat Giant Mimir, his long grey beard sweeping
over his knees, and his great piercing eyes shining with fierce light
as the new-comer approached.

"What do you want here?" he demanded, in a voice that sounded like the
muttering of thunder before a storm.

"I want a drink of yon water from your glittering horn, good Mimir,"
said Odin.

But Giant Mimir sunk his great head upon his chest, and looking from
under his shaggy eyebrows, growled again:

"Begone, I tell you. I give no man drink from my well."

Then Odin drew himself up to his full height, and in a voice that was
more thunderous than that of the giant himself, cried:

"No man am I, O Mimir, but Odin, Father of Asas and men. Refuse not to
me the gift of wisdom; for though I can see all things that happen in
heaven and earth, I cannot see what lies beneath the deep, nor can I
see what shall happen in the future. Give me, therefore, the draught
of wisdom, and I will pay you whatsoever you demand."

But Mimir still refused. "We giants are of elder race than ye Asas
be," he said, "and all the wisdom in the world is in our hands. If I
give you to drink of this water you will become wise even as we are,
and an enemy more dangerous than ever."

"Nevertheless," replied Odin firmly, "you must give me the water, and
I will pay you whatsoever you may ask."

Then Mimir, feeling sure that such a payment would be refused, said,
"I will give you the magic draught in return for one of your eyes."

But to his amazement, for the god was very proud of his keen vision,
Odin at once plucked forth an eye and handed it to him, saying:

"No price is too high to pay for wisdom."

So Mimir was obliged to hand him the horn filled with precious water,
and Odin drank a full draught, caring not at all that henceforth he
was to have but one eye, for he knew that he had gained the precious
gift of wisdom beyond any in the world save Mimir himself.

Meantime, Mimir dropped the eye of the Asa into the well, where it
shines bright as the moon reflected in still waters; and he bade Odin
depart, saying heavily, "This day is the beginning of trouble betwixt
your race and mine."

Determined to put his new-found wisdom to the test, All-Father Odin
now disguised himself as a wandering minstrel and went to visit the
Most Learned of all the Giants save Mimir, who, of course, knew
everything in the whole world. And the Most Learned Giant received him
graciously, and consented readily to enter into a contest of wit, and
it was agreed that the loser should forfeit his head.

The Most Learned Giant was the first to begin. He questioned Odin as
to the size and colour of the horses which bore the chariots of Night
and Day across the sky; he asked him the source of the river which
separated the Land of the Giants from Asgard, and finally he demanded
details about the last battle that was to be fought between Asas and
giants in far-distant days.

All these questions were fully and promptly answered by Odin, and it
was now his turn. He questioned his rival first as to the Beginning of
All Things; then he asked what the heroes did in Valhalla, what was
the work of the Weird Sisters, and who would carry on the work of the
gods when they had passed away.

And all these were fully answered by the Most Learned Giant.

Then Odin bent down to the Giant's ear as he sat on his great seat,
and said softly:

"Tell me, lastly, I pray you, what are the words that the All-Father
will whisper to his son Balder as he lies dead upon his funeral pyre?"

At this the Most Learned Giant uprose, and looking hard into the sad
and troubled face of his questioner, said:

"No one but Odin himself can answer that question, and no one but
Odin would have asked it. For only he who has drunk of the water of
wisdom would foresee the death in the far-off future of his dearest
son. Kill me now, therefore, for thou hast triumphed."

Here the tale comes to an end; but we should like to think that Odin
spared the life of the Most Learned Giant, and perhaps he would have
done so the more readily because his heart was softened by the
knowledge, born of his new-found wisdom, that Balder, his beautiful
son, must die.

Another story is told in which Odin's great wisdom seemed for a time
at fault.

We have noticed how fond was the All-Father of watching the affairs of
mortal men. He was especially interested, at one time, in two handsome
little princes, the sons of a certain king, who were usually to be
found playing or wrestling or riding together on the seashore which
bounded their father's kingdom.

Geirrod and Agnar were the names of these boys, and All-Father Odin
and his wife Frigga grew so fond of them both that, disguising
themselves as an old man and woman, they went to live upon a desert
island which lay far out at sea, opposite the beach where the children
played. Presently it came to pass, exactly as they hoped, that the
boys went fishing, and Odin made a storm to arise, and the rough wind
blew the little boat away from the land, and finally stranded it upon
the island.

The boys, frightened, wet, and hungry, came timidly to the door of the
hut where the old people dwelt and asked for shelter. They were
received kindly by Odin and Frigga, who kept the boys all the long
winter, making much of them and delighting in their childish fun and
merriment. Geirrod was Odin's favourite. He taught him to fight, to
swim, and to use the bow and spear. But Frigga loved best the gentle
little Agnar, the elder boy, who would sit by her side and rest his
head upon her knee, well contented, while she told him strange tales
of beautiful Asgard, the home of the gods.

Spring came at length, and, when the sea was calm and still, Odin put
the two boys aboard a boat and bade them sail back to their father.
And Agnar grieved at leaving his kind old friends, but Geirrod did not
even so much as look back to respond to their farewell.

The favourable breezes which Odin had called up soon urged the boat to
land; but the moment it touched the shore Geirrod sprang out, and,
pushing it back into the sea with all his might, bade his brother sail
away to the Land of Giants and never return.

Odin, feeling sure that all was well with the boys, had resigned his
care for their safety and had returned to Asgard, and thus the giants
were able to play him a trick, which they did by causing the wind to
veer round, whereby Agnar was carried away to the edge of the world.

Meantime, the hard-hearted Geirrod ran cheerfully into his father's
palace, and announced that he had come back alone from a desert island
upon which his boat had been stranded, his elder brother having been
drowned in the sea.

His father was overjoyed to see him, for he had given up hope of
setting eyes on either of his sons again. He made him his heir, and in
due time, when some years had passed away, he died, and Geirrod became
king in his stead.

Now All-Father Odin had so many things to attend to that, as we have
seen, he thought no more of his boy friends for many years.

Then at length, when Geirrod had sat for some time on his fathers
throne, Odin looked from his high seat in Asgard upon him, and seeing
with pleasure how great a man he had become, his thoughts turned to
Agnar. For a time he could see nothing of him, but at last he
discerned that he had returned in disguise to his brother's palace and
was living there, unknown to Geirrod, as a servant.

Then Odin turned to Frigga, who sat by his side on the high seat, and
said tauntingly, "Did I not always say that Geirrod was by far the
better and braver and stronger of those two boys? Behold, although he
is the younger, he sits upon his father's throne, while Agnar brews
ale for his table."

To this Frigga quietly replied: "It is better to be a poor servant
than a hard-hearted king. For see how rich is Geirrod; yet he turns
away the guest from the door, and ill-treats those who ask a kindness
at his hands."

"I will never believe it," said Odin, who could be very obstinate when
he liked; "and to prove you are wrong I will disguise myself again as
a wanderer, and ask for food and shelter from the king."

So he took his blue-grey cloak and broad-brimmed hat, and, with a
pilgrim's staff in his hand, set off adown the Rainbow Bridge.
Meantime, Frigga, determined to show that she was right, and to
prevent Geirrod from receiving Odin with favour by mere chance, sent a
swift and secret messenger, warning the king to beware of a man in a
blue-grey mantle and wide-brimmed hat, for that he, a pretended
wanderer, was an enchanter who would put the king under a spell.

Scarcely had the messenger fulfilled his mission when Odin knocked at
the great door of the palace and begged for food and shelter. He had
not the slightest doubt that these would be granted him, for
inhospitality to strangers was one of the greatest crimes a Northman
could commit.

Judge then of his surprise when, instead of being offered a seat at
the supper-table and a bed for the night, he was seized by the beard,
and dragged roughly into the presence of Geirrod.

"Where do you come from, and what is your name, O miserable old man?"
asked the angry king.

"My name is Grimnir," answered Odin, now well on his guard, "but where
I come from I will not say, since that is my concern alone."

Then the king's wrath knew no bounds, and finding it impossible to
make the old man speak, he ordered that he should be chained to a
pillar between two fires, whose flames scorched him on either side
without actually burning him.

For eight days and nights was Odin imprisoned thus, and during all
that time the cruel Geirrod would give him neither food nor drink, and
kept close watch to see that he obtained them from no one else.

But one night, when the watchmen were drowsy from the heat of the
fire, a serving-man came stealthily over the floor, a horn of ale in
his hand. Holding this to the parched lips of the prisoner, he gave
him a long, cool drink; and then did Odin recognize the features of
Agnar, brother of the king, who should have been king in his stead.

The next evening, as Geirrod sat at the head of the table gloating
over the sufferings of his prisoner, Odin suddenly began to sing.
Softly the notes began, but soon they grew louder and louder, till the
great hall echoed and re-echoed the song of triumph. And at length he
sang how Geirrod, who had so long enjoyed the favour of the gods, was
now about to meet the just reward of his misdeeds:

    "Thy life is now run out:
    Wroth with thee are the gods:
    Odin thou now shalt see:
    Draw near me if thou canst."

With these words the chain fell from off his hands, the flames shot up
to the roof and died away, and Odin stood in the midst of the hall, no
longer a poor and suffering wayfarer, but revealed in all the might
and majesty of a god.

Directly he had understood the meaning of the song, Geirrod had risen
to his feet with drawn sword, meaning to kill his prisoner, but so
startled was he at the sudden change in his appearance that he
stumbled back, and, losing his footing, he fell upon the sharp point
of his own sword and miserably perished.

When his words had been thus fulfilled, Odin turned to Agnar, who,
with the other servants, had rushed into the hall, and bade him take
his rightful place upon his father's throne, and in return for his
kind act in bringing the draught of ale he promised him prosperity and
happiness so long as he should live.




CHAPTER III

How the Queen of the Sky Gave Gifts to Men

_This is the tale which the Northmen tell
of Frigga, Queen of the Asas._


By the side of All-Father Odin, upon his high seat in Asgard, sat
Frigga, his wife, the Queen of the Asas. Sometimes she would be
dressed in snow-white garments, bound at the waist by a golden girdle,
from which hung a great bunch of golden keys. And the earth-dwellers,
gazing into the sky, would admire the great white clouds as they
floated across the blue, not perceiving that these clouds were really
the folds of Frigga's flowing white robe, as it waved in the wind.

At other times she would wear dark grey or purple garments; and then
the earth-dwellers made haste into their houses, for they said, "the
sky is lowering to-day, and a storm is nigh at hand."

Frigga had a palace of her own called Fensalir, or the Hall of Mists,
where she spent much of her time at her wheel, spinning golden thread,
or weaving web after web of many-coloured clouds. All night long she
sat at this golden wheel, and if you look at the sky on a starry night
you may chance to see it set up where the men of the South show a
constellation called the Girdle of Orion.

Husbands and wives who had dwelt lovingly together upon earth were
invited by Frigga to her hall when they died, so that they might be
for ever united within its hospitable walls.

    "There in the glen Fensalir stands, the house
    Of Frigga, honoured mother of the gods,
    And shows its lighted windows, and the open doors."

Frigga was especially interested in all good housewives, and she
herself set them an excellent example in Fensalir. When the snowflakes
fell, the earth-dwellers knew it was Frigga shaking her great feather
bed, and when it rained they said it was her washing day. It was she
who first gave to them the gift of flax that the women upon earth
might spin, and weave, and bleach their linen as white as the clouds
of her own white robe.

And this is how it came about.

There once was a shepherd who lived among the mountains with his wife
and children; and so very poor was he that he often found it hard to
give his family enough to satisfy their hunger. But he did not
grumble; he only worked the harder; and his wife, though she had
scarcely any furniture, and never a chance of a new dress, kept the
house so clean, and the old clothes so well mended, that, all unknown
to herself, she rose high in the favour of the all-seeing Frigga.

Now one day, when the shepherd had driven his few poor sheep up the
mountain to pasture, a fine reindeer sprang from the rocks above him
and began to leap upward along the steep slope. The shepherd snatched
up his crossbow and pursued the animal, thinking to himself: "Now we
shall have a better meal than we have had for many a long day."

Up and up leaped the reindeer, always just out of reach and at length
disappeared behind a great boulder just as the shepherd, breathless
and weary, reached the spot. No sign of the reindeer was to be seen,
but, on looking round, the shepherd saw that he was among the snowy
heights of the mountains, and almost at the top of a great glacier.

Presently, as he pursued his vain search for the animal, he saw to his
amazement an open door, leading apparently into the heart of the
glacier. He was a fearless man, and so, without hesitation, he passed
boldly through the doorway and found himself standing in a marvellous
cavern, lit up by blazing torches which gleamed upon rich jewels
hanging from the roof and walls. And in the midst stood a woman, most
fair to behold, clad in snow-white robes and surrounded by a group of
lovely maidens.

The shepherd's boldness gave way at this awesome sight, and he sank to
his knees before the Asa, Frigga, for she it was. But Frigga bade him
be of good cheer, and said: "Choose now whatsoever you will to carry
away with you as a remembrance of this place."

The shepherd's eyes wandered over the glittering jewels on the walls
and roof, but they came back to a little bunch of blue flowers which
Frigga held in her hand. They alone looked homelike to him; the rest
were hard and cold; so he asked timidly that he might be given the
little nosegay.

Then Frigga smiled kindly upon him.

"Most wise has been your choice," said she. "Take with the flowers
this measure of seed and sow it in your field, and you shall grow
flowers of your own. They shall bring prosperity to you and yours."

So the shepherd took the flowers and the seed, and scarcely had he
done so when a mighty peal of thunder, followed by the shock of an
earthquake, rent the cavern, and when he had collected his senses he
found himself once more upon the mountain side.

When he reached home and had told his tale, his wife scolded him
roundly for not bringing home a jewel which would have made them rich
for ever. But when she would have thrown the flowers away he prevented
her. Next day he sowed the seed in his field, and was surprised to
find how far it went.

Very soon after this the field was thick with tiny green shoots; and
though his wife reproached him for wasting good ground upon useless
flowers, he watched and waited in hope until the field was blue with
the starry flax blooms.

Then one night, when the flowers had withered and the seed was ripe,
Frigga, in the disguise of an old woman, visited the lowly hut and
showed the shepherd and his astonished wife how to use the flax
stalks; how to spin them into thread, and how to weave the thread into
linen.

It was not long before all the dwellers in that part of the earth had
heard of the wonderful material, and were hurrying to the shepherd's
hut to buy the bleached linen or the seed from which it was obtained.
And so the shepherd and his family were soon among the richest people
in the land; and the promise of Frigga was amply fulfilled.




CHAPTER IV

How a Giant Built a Fortress for the Asas

_This is the tale the Northmen tell of how
a giant once built a fortress for the Asas._


Although their city of Asgard was beautiful beyond compare, the Asas
who lived therein could not forget that the race of the giants kept
unwearying watch to do them despite. Even All-Father Odin was troubled
when he remembered Mimir's warning that the draught of wisdom would
ever work strife between the races of Asas and giants. And so at
length the Asas, meeting in their Council Chamber at the roots of the
Tree of Life, resolved that something more should be done to guard
themselves. Already, it is true, the watchman Heimdall kept ward over
the Rainbow Bridge by night and day, blowing a soft note on his horn
to announce the coming or going of the Asas, but prepared to give a
terrible blast should any of the Frost Giants attempt to cross the
bridge.

Heimdall, however, might be overpowered before aid could reach him,
and so it was decided to build, just within Asgard, a great fortress,
which should be so strong that the Asas could rest safely behind its
walls, even if the Frost Giants should invade their city.

The next question was, Who should build this fortress?

None of the Asas knew of a likely architect, and while they were
discussing where one should be found, the horn of Heimdall rang out in
token of the approach of a stranger.

Out rushed the Asas, and there, in parley with Heimdall, stood a
gigantic figure with powerful limbs, on which the muscles stood out
like ropes of iron.

Heimdall was speaking sharply, for he did not altogether like the
stranger's look. "For what purpose do you come?" he was inquiring.

"I am a Master Builder," replied the stranger. "I can build towers and
forts more strongly than any other builder in all the world. Have you
anything of the kind that wants doing here?"

The eyes of the Asas met as they heard these words, and Odin, stepping
forward, said, "Can you build us a fortress so strong that not all the
strength of the Frost Giants could avail against it?"

"Ay, that can I," replied the stranger. "Look at my strong arms and
see the breadth of my chest. If you will set me to work you shall soon
find my worth as a Master Builder."

"How long will the fortress take to build?" asked Odin.

"I will build it for you in three half years," replied the stranger.

"And what do you ask as wages?" said Odin, and the Master Builder
answered promptly:

"You must give me the sun, the moon, and Freya for my wife."

At these words the Asas, who had been pressing forward to hear the
conference, fell back with muttered disapproval. For Freya was the
most beautiful maiden in Asgard, the joy and pride of the city, ever
young and ever fair; and the sun and moon were the light and life of
men in the world below. So they bade the Master Builder come again
next day, and meantime retired to their Council Hall to consider the
matter.

All-Father Odin was for sending the Builder promptly about his
business when he returned for their decision, but his brother Loki
counselled a different course.

Red Loki was a mischievous, sly fellow, full of wiles and deceit, and
always quick to suggest a way out of a difficulty. On this occasion
his plan was to allow the man to build the fortress, and to promise
him the terms demanded, but subject to the condition that he fulfilled
his task in a way that would be impossible for him fully to carry out.

His eloquence persuaded the Asas, and next day, when the Builder
returned for their decision, Loki, as their spokesman, called to the
mighty fellow as he crossed the bridge:

"Good man, we cannot wait for three half years for the completion of
our fortress. But if you will undertake to do the work in the course
of one winter, without any assistance, you shall have Freya, and the
sun and moon to boot. If, however, on the first day of summer, one
stone is missing from its place, the fortress will be ours without any
payment whatever, since you will have broken your plighted word."

At this the Master Builder did not look well pleased. He pulled his
great beard and eyed the speaker doubtfully, muttering that the time
was too short for so great a task; but when Loki pretended to turn
away, as though the matter were ended, he called after him:

"Well, have it so--the fortress shall be built in the time you set.
But you must at least let me have the help of my good horse Svadilfare
to carry stone."

When they heard this request the Asas demurred, saying: "He means to
play us some trick."

But Loki persuaded them to make this trifling concession.

"For," said he, "of what use can a horse be in building a fortress? He
will never be able to finish the place in time, and we shall get our
fort for nothing. At least you can let him have his great clumsy horse
for any use that he may be."

So the Asas agreed, and went their different ways, leaving the Master
Builder to his work.

The winter months passed on, and while the Asas busied themselves with
their various occupations and amusements, the Master Builder was
toiling with might and main. But he could have done little in the time
if he had not had the help of his wonderful horse Svadilfare, who not
only dragged huge blocks of stone to the spot, but raised them into
position with his strong forefeet. And this was done with such speed
that, some days before the end of winter, the fortress was finished,
with the exception of three blocks of stone which were to form one of
the gateways.

Then the Asas suddenly realised what was about to happen. In less than
three days more the fortress would be finished; it needed, in fact,
but one night's work to make all complete. They remembered with horror
the price they had undertaken to pay; the loss not only of Freya,
fairest of maidens, but also of sun and moon, whose light was the joy
of their life and the necessity of mankind.

"It is Red Loki," said they, "who has brought us to this sad pass." So
they began to reproach him very bitterly, threatening even to kill him
if he did not find some way to evade the loss which threatened them.

At length, being really frightened, Loki promised to do
something--anything, that would prevent the Master Builder from
finishing the work during the three days that yet remained of winter.

That same night good Svadilfare was painfully dragging a great block
of stone along the path to the new-built fortress, when Red Loki,
changed into the semblance of a pretty little grey mare, came running
up, saying, as plainly as horses can speak:

"Down below there is a delightful green meadow. Do come with me, and
take a holiday from this ever-lasting work."

Scarcely had he heard her neigh when the steed kicked off his harness,
left the block of stone to roll down the steep hill, and rushed after
the mare. Away ran Loki, away ran Svadilfare, and after them rushed
the Master Builder, shouting and yelling in vain. The noise they made
was terrific, for the gallop of the horses and the _thud_, _thud_, of
the mighty Builder shook the walls of Asgard and made the
earth-dwellers shrink in terror from what they imagined to be
thunderstorms and earthquakes. But the Builder never found his horse,
for Loki had lured him to a meadow hidden safely away within a secret
grove.

When the Master Builder returned to the fortress the first day of
summer had dawned, and lo! the winter was gone, and the gateway of the
building was unfinished.

Before it stood the Asas, and All-Father Odin greeted the Builder
with:

"See, fellow, here is the first day of summer and your task is not yet
fulfilled. Begone, then, from Asgard, for we are free from our bond,
and would have no further dealing with thee or thy evil brood."

Then the Builder perceived that Odin knew who he really was, and with
a roar of rage he returned to his own form, and stood revealed as a
mighty Frost Giant, almost as huge as the fortress he had built.

Shaking his great fist at the Asas, he shouted threateningly:

"Ye have tricked and fooled me enough. Not for nothing does a Frost
Giant stand within the walls of Asgard. Were it not so strongly built
I would now tear down this fortress that I have raised; but your own
palaces are not giant-built, and see to it that they are not soon
tumbling about your ears!"

And in good sooth he might have torn down the very halls of the Asas
in his rage, had not Thor at that moment dashed up the Rainbow Bridge
in his chariot drawn by goats. For all this while Thor, the strongest
of the Asas, had been away on a long journey; and had this not been
so, the giants would have had little cause to fear.

Springing from his chariot as the furious giant was about to pull the
roof off Valhalla, Thor gave him so mighty a blow on the head with his
huge hammer that his skull broke into little bits and his body fell
down into the Land of Mists.

"Take that for your wages," roared Thor, as he swung his hammer on
high, "and in this same manner will I repay all of the race of Frost
Giants who seek to set foot in Asgard."

And so in this way was built for the Asas a fortress so strong that
none of the giant folk could dare to raise hand against it. But always
it lacked three stones in the gateway, for no one except a Frost Giant
could lift such mighty blocks into place.




CHAPTER V

The Magic Mead

_This is the tale the Northmen tell of how All-Father Odin
brought the Magic Mead to Asgard._


There once lived among the earth-dwellers a certain man named Kvasir,
who was very wise. He did not keep his wisdom to himself, as Mimir
did, but went his way through all the world, answering questions and
sharing his gift with those who cared for it. And wherever he went men
were the better for his silver words, for Kvasir was a poet, the first
who ever lived, and by his gift of poetry he made glad the hearts of
gods and men.

Now when the dwarf people saw how Kvasir was loved and honoured, they
grew jealous of him, and plotted to work him evil. So two of their
number, called Fialar and Galar, met Kvasir one day and begged him to
visit their cave under the earth and to take counsel with them
concerning a very secret and important matter.

Glad, as was his wont, to help others, Kvasir agreed, whereupon the
dwarfs conducted him into a dark and dismal place underground; and
there, taking him unawares, they treacherously slew him, and poured
his blood into three jars. This they mixed with honey, and thus made a
Magic Mead, of such a nature that whoever drinks of it receives the
gift of poesy, and his speech is silver and his heart is filled with
wisdom.

It was not long before the gods in Asgard, missing the sweet sound of
Kvasir's voice throughout the earth, began to make inquiries as to
what had become of him.

The wicked dwarfs had spread the report that the wise man had choked
by reason of his great wisdom. But All-Father Odin knew well that this
absurd tale was not true, and was on the watch to see what mischief
Fialar and Galar had been brewing.

Meantime, the dwarfs did not taste a drop of the Magic Mead, but hid
it away in a secret place, while they went off in search of further
adventures.

After awhile they found the Giant Gilling fast asleep by the seashore,
and they began to pinch him till he was wide awake.

"Take us for a row on the sea, Gilling," they shouted, in their
impudent little voices.

So the Giant Gilling, who was good-natured and stupid, got into a
boat, and being very lazy, allowed the dwarfs to take the oars and row
where they would.

Then Fialar and Galar rowed on to an unseen rock and upset the boat,
so that the giant, who could not swim, was drowned; but they
themselves perched astride on the keel, and the boat soon drifted
ashore.

Hurrying to the giant's house they told his wife, with a fine pretence
of sympathy, that her husband had fallen into the sea and was drowned.
At this the poor giantess began to sob and groan until the walls shook
with the noise. Then Fialar said to his brother:

"Tired am I of this bawling. I will now take her out, and as she
passes through the doorway, drop a millstone on her head; and then
there will be an end to them both."

Forthwith he asked if it would not comfort her to look upon the sea
where her dear husband lay drowned; and she said it would. But as she
passed through the doorway wicked Galar, who had scrambled up above
the lintel, dropped a millstone on her head, and so she too fell an
easy victim to the malice of the cruel brothers.

Now while the two dwarfs were jumping and skipping about in their
wicked glee at the success of their evil plans, the Giant Suttung, son
of Gilling, came home, and finding that his mother and father were
both dead, he quickly guessed who were at the bottom of the mischief,
and determined to put an end to the wretches.

Before they could evade his wrath, he grasped one of the dwarfs in
each of his great hands, and, wading out into the ocean, he set them
down upon a rock which he knew would be flooded at high tide, and
there left them.

Then Fialar and Galar began to scream with terror, and to offer
anything that Suttung chose to ask for, if only he would spare their
lives.

Now Suttung had heard, as most people had done, of the Magic Mead, and
he thought that this was a fine opportunity of getting it into his
possession. So he bargained with the dwarfs, and they gladly promised
to give him the whole brew if only he would save them from their
perilous plight.

Suttung waited till they had had a good fright, and then, as the first
wave washed over them, he waded to the rock and lifted them off. He
took good care, however, not to give them their liberty until they had
handed over the three jars of Magic Mead.

The moment he had got the precious jars into his possession Suttung
hid them in a cave deep down in the centre of a mountain, and he set
his daughter, Gunlod, the Giant-Maiden, to keep watch and ward,
charging her to guard the cavern night and day, and to allow neither
gods nor men to have so much as a sip of the marvellous liquid.

Meantime, All-Father Odin had sent forth his ravens, Hugin and Munin,
to find out what had become of the wise Kvasir. For a while even they
were puzzled by his complete disappearance, but presently they heard
men talk of the Magic Mead that had been made from his blood, and so,
little by little, they learned the truth, and flying back to Odin,
they perched on his shoulders, and whispered it into his ears.

Now All-Father Odin was sorry for Kvasir, but he was still more vexed
to think that this wonderful gift of poetry should be in the hands of
his enemies, the giants. He began, therefore, to consider how he could
get it from them, for though he had drained the draught of wisdom in
speech and song, and nothing save a draught of the Magic Mead would
bring him that gift.

So once more All-Father Odin disguised himself as an aged wanderer,
pulled his grey hat well over his brows, threw his storm-hued cloak
around him, and journeyed to the Land of Giants.

Searching about for the home of Suttung, Odin presently passed by a
field where nine ugly serving-men were mowing hay. Now these were the
servants of Baugi, the brother of Suttung, as Odin very well knew; so,
after watching them for awhile, he called out:

"Hi, fellows! Your scythes are blunt. Would you like me to whet them
for you?"

Glad of an excuse to stop work, the men shouted, "Yes."

Then Odin took a whetstone from his belt and whetted the scythes till
they were sharp as razors.

The servants were much struck with the speed and skill with which this
was done, and they all called out together to ask if the whetstone was
for sale.

Odin replied that he was willing to sell it if he could get a fair
price; upon which they all yelled at once that they would pay whatever
he asked.

"Then let him have it who catches it," said Odin, and with that he
threw the whetstone up in the air.

And then a tremendous struggle began. Each man fought with his
neighbour for the stone and hacked at him with his keen scythe; and
within a very few minutes all the nine serving-men lay dead on the
field.

With a grim smile at the greed and quarrelsome behaviour which had
brought them to this end, Odin passed on to the house of the Giant
Baugi, and begged for supper and shelter for the night. The giant
received him hospitably enough, and was about to sit down to table
with him, when word was brought that his nine servants had killed each
other and lay dead in the field.

Then Baugi began to complain and lament his bad luck, saying: "Here
have I never had a better harvest, and yet there is not a man left to
gather it in."

"Suppose you give _me_ a trial," suggested Odin, "for though I look
old I can do the work of nine men, and that you will soon find."

"What do you want for your wages?" asked Baugi doubtfully, for he
guessed that the stranger was somebody out of the common.

"Nothing but a draught of the Magic Mead stored away by your brother
Suttung," answered Odin calmly.

"'Tis no easy thing you ask of me, good fellow," replied Baugi, "nor
is it mine to give. But if you will do my work I will go with you to
my brother when all is done, and we will do our best to get the mead."

So Odin set to work all that summer-time, and never before had Baugi
had such service done. Then, when the first breath of frost touched
the autumn leaves, the toiler laid aside his tools and, going to his
master, asked for his reward.

But Baugi shook his head doubtfully. "'Tis a harder matter than you
think," said he. "Come with me, however, and I will do my best for
you."

So they went together to the house of Suttung, and Baugi entered in
and boldly asked his brother to give him a drink of the Magic Mead,
wherewith to reward his servant.

At this Suttung flew into a great rage, and reproached Baugi for
asking such a thing. "You have been fooled," he cried, "for this is
none other than one of the gods, our deadly enemies, who, when he
drinks the mead, will use his new-found wisdom in our despite. If you
take my advice, you will do this enemy an ill turn while you have him
in your power."

So Baugi went back to Odin, his heart torn between hatred of the god
and fear as to what would happen if he did not keep his promise; but
he only told gloomily that he had failed to get the mead.

Then Odin said, "If Suttung will not give the mead because of your
promise, we must get it by some trick. And you will have to help me in
this, because of your plighted word."

To this Baugi pretended to agree, but all the while he was trying to
think of a plan whereby he could make an end of his troublesome
servant.

They now made their way to the mountain where Gunlod kept watch over
her treasured jars of mead. But her cave was hidden far away in the
centre of the mountain, and none but Suttung knew how to find the
entrance.

Baugi only pretended to join in the long and fruitless search, and at
length, tired out, Odin took from his pocket an auger, wherewith holes
are bored, and bade the giant use his great strength to drill a hole
through the mountain to the cave.

Accordingly Baugi bored away and presently cried out, "See, there is
your hole right into the cave!"

But Odin warily blew into the hole, and immediately chips of rock and
dust flew back into his face, showing that the hole extended only a
little way.

Then Odin knew, what before he had only guessed, that Baugi was trying
to trick him; but he only looked at him grimly and said:

"Bore deeper, master, bore deeper."

And the giant was so frightened by the gleam in the iron-grey eye that
he seized the auger, and this time made a hole which really pierced
the mountain and penetrated to the hidden cave.

Directly Odin had made sure that Baugi had fulfilled his task, he
changed himself into a snake and wriggled into the hole before Baugi
had realised what had happened.

The next moment Baugi gave a stab at the snake with the sharp auger,
hoping to cut him in two, but Odin was too quick for him, and he
wriggled out of sight as the blow fell.

Odin crept a long way through the mountain until he came at length to
a dark cave; and then he took again the form of the Father of Gods and
Men.

Looking about him for awhile in the dimness of the cavern, he saw at
length the beautiful Giant-Maiden, resting her head wearily on her
hands and gazing at the great jars of mead which stood before her on a
ledge as though she hated their very sight.

Coming softly to her side, Odin bent over her and gently kissed her
forehead. Gunlod at this sprang up in terror, but when she saw Odin's
kind face, her fears vanished and she smiled back at him.

"Whence come you?" asked the beautiful Giant-Maiden.

"I come from a long, long way off," replied the god, "and I am thirsty
after my journey. May I taste the mead that stands in yon vessels?"

Gunlod shook her head till her long golden locks fell in confusion
over her like a shower of laburnum blossom; but Odin set himself so
winningly to coax her that, after she had held out for some long time,
she told him at last that he might take one sip from each jar.

The words were hardly uttered ere Odin seized the first jar and in a
moment had drained it dry. Then he snatched up the second and the
third; and before Gunlod realised what had happened he had kissed her
again, and, passing rapidly through the hole, had flown forth into the
fresh air in the form of an eagle, and was bearing away the precious
mead in his mouth to Asgard.

Meanwhile, Baugi had gone back to the Giant Suttung with the tale of
how he had seen the mysterious serving-man change into a snake and
wriggle through a hole in the mountain; and Suttung at once guessed
that they had to deal with Odin himself. So he hurried to the hole and
sat there to watch for the return of the snake.

But he had to wait so long that at length he grew drowsy, and in
order to keep awake he was just pricking himself with the branch of a
neighbouring thorn-bush, when _birr! whizz!_ a great bird dashed out
of the hole and made off into the upper air.

This awoke Suttung effectually. He knew he had missed a good chance of
killing Odin, and that, in all probability, in the very act of
carrying off the Magic Mead to Asgard; but he would not give up all
hope, and next moment, in the form of another eagle, he was pursuing
his enemy in eager flight.

Now Odin was heavy with the mead he had drunk, and his head was dizzy,
so that he did not always fly along the straightest path. Little by
little Suttung gained on him therefore, till it became very uncertain
whether Odin could first reach the walls of Asgard.

The loud rush of fast-beating wings through the air attracted the
attention of the gods, and they crowded to the walls of Asgard to
watch the progress of the eagle, in whom they easily recognised Odin.

Some prepared great dishes in which to receive the Magic Mead from his
mouth; others, seeing that he might be caught by his pursuer before he
could reach the city, gathered a great pile of wood outside the walls,
and heaped it with tow and tar and turpentine. To this they set fire,
just as Odin flew over the battlements. And the flames shot up and
burnt the wings of the pursuing eagle, so that Suttung tumbled to the
earth and could fly no more.

Odin, exhausted and breathless, was meantime filling the dishes which
the gods held ready for the Magic Mead, but so hurried was he that
some of it was spilt; a few scattered drops fell on to the earth
below.

Men rushed eagerly to catch the precious drops in their mouths; but
none could get enough to be made wise with the true spirit of poesy.
Some caught enough to become makers of rhymes and verses, but this is
a different thing.

The Magic Mead was henceforth kept in Asgard under the charge of
white-haired Bragi, the son of Odin, he who plays so beautifully upon
the harp that it seems to sing of itself.

And once or twice in every hundred years or so, the gods allow some
very favoured babe of mortal man to drink a full draught of the Magic
Mead. Then, when the child grows up, he becomes a great poet, and
people say he is "inspired."




CHAPTER VI

How Loki Made a Wager with the Dwarfs

_This is the tale the Northmen tell of how
Loki once made a Wager with the Dwarfs._


A most mischievous and tricky god was Loki, always on the look-out to
play some wicked prank which was sure to bring trouble upon himself or
others. It was, indeed, a wonder that the other Asas put up with him
so long in Asgard; but then, you see, he was Odin's brother.

One day, when Loki was looking about him for diversions, he saw asleep
in the sunlight Sif, the beautiful wife of Thor the Thunderer.

Now Sif was noted among all the dwellers in Asgard for her glorious
hair, which hung down to her heels and was like a thick web of golden
silk. When she stood up it covered her like a cloak, and when she lay
down it was like a golden coverlet; and Thor, her husband, thought it
was the most beautiful thing in all the habitation of the gods.

Now mischievous Loki saw her sleeping under the gleaming mass of
golden web, and he took a pair of sharp scissors and cut it all off
close to her head, so that she looked quite bald and ugly.

When Thor came home and saw what had happened, he was wild with fury,
and guessing at once who had done the deed, he stamped off to find Red
Loki, vowing that he would break every bone in his body.

Then Loki, when he heard the thunder of Thor's tramp and saw the
lightning flash from his angry eyes, was terrified, and attempted to
change himself into another shape; but before he could do so the
wrathful god had gripped him by the throat and was shaking the life
out of him.

"Let me go!" gasped Loki. "Let me go, and I will bring new hair for
Sif ere the daylight's gone."

"Go, then," roared Thor, "but mind, if you break your word you will
have not only to reckon with _me_, but with Odin and Frey as well."

Then, giving Loki a last shake, he sent him flying over the
battlements and down the Rainbow Bridge like a falling star.

Now Loki was terrified at the result of his trick, and dread of the
punishment that Odin might have in store for him, when he returned
with the hair, began to assail him. So he determined to take back with
him two presents, one for his mighty brother, and one for Frey, the
god of the Golden Sunshine.

Leaping on to the earth, he quickly made his way through a hillside
into the depths of the mountains, never stopping till he had reached
the dark and gloomy district of Dwarfland.

For a time Loki could see nothing, though he heard on every side the
tapping hammers and heaving bellows of the Little Men.

Presently, however, he distinguished a tiny furnace with its burning
flame, and saw by its light a little squat figure, who pulled off his
peaked cap and asked the visitor what he wanted.

"I want you to make me three gifts," said Loki; "one for Odin, and one
for Frey, and the third must be golden hair that will grow upon Sif's
head."

Now the dwarfs were anxious to keep on good terms with the gods, who
could protect them against the giants; and so, when they heard Loki's
request, they readily agreed to make the three things. Accordingly,
they set to work upon a pile of golden nuggets, and spun from them a
mass of the finest gold thread, so smooth and soft that it looked like
the loveliest hair. This they gave to Loki, telling him that directly
it touched the head of Sif it would become as a natural growth.

"Now give me something for Odin," said Loki, well pleased.

So the dwarfs set to work again, and presently fashioned the spear
called Gungnir, which, however badly it might be aimed, was always
sure to go straight to its mark.

Loki gratefully took the spear, and there now only remained the gift
for Frey.

The dwarfs thought awhile, and then set to work upon a ship which,
when pressed together, would fold up and go into one's pocket, but
which, when allowed to expand, would hold all the gods in Asgard and
their horses, would sail through air as well as on water, and would
always get a favourable wind directly it hoisted canvas.

Loki was immensely pleased with these gifts, and went away, declaring
loudly that his dwarf friends were the cleverest smiths in all the
world.

Now it so fell out that his words were heard by another dwarf, named
Brock, who came and stood in his way and looked with scorn at the ship
and the spear and the golden web which he carried in his hands.

"A clumsy lot of things you have there!" he jeered. "Why, my brother
Sindri could make gifts that are far more wonderful than those."

"My head against yours that he could not!" said Loki, getting angry.

"Done!" chuckled Brock with a leer, and forthwith they made their way
to the underground cave where Sindri was at work in his forge.

Now Sindri was quite ready to take up the challenge, but only on
condition that Brock would blow the bellows for him. Loki now began to
feel uneasy, for he had hoped the dwarf would decline to compete when
he heard what were the gifts he had to improve upon. But Sindri only
wagged his long beard at them contemptuously, and Loki's head began to
tremble for the result of his wager.

So he determined to try and hinder the work.

Meantime Sindri had thrown a pigskin into the furnace, and had gone
outside to find a magic charm, saying as he went:

"Blow, brother, blow with all thy might till I return, and stay not
thy hand for an instant."

Directly Loki heard this he changed himself into a great stinging fly,
and lighting on Brock's hand, he stung him with all his might. But the
dwarf never stopped blowing, though he stamped and roared with pain.
Then Sindri returned, and going to the furnace drew from it a golden
boar of great size, which had the power of flying through the sky and
scattering light from his golden bristles as he flew. But Brock did
not know all this, and looked somewhat scornfully at the gift, saying:

"I thought you could do better than this."

"Wait a bit," said Sindri, and with that he threw a lump of gold upon
the fire and went out, charging his brother not to stop blowing for an
instant.

Then in flew Loki again, still disguised as a gadfly, and lighted on
Brock's neck and stung him so that the blood flowed. But though the
dwarf yelled with pain he did not cease blowing.

When Sindri returned he pulled out of the fire a fine gold ring. And
this ring was made in such a marvellous fashion that every ninth night
nine other rings would drop from it, so that its owner would be the
richest being in the world.

But Brock did not know all this, and only growled.

"Wait a bit," said Sindri again, and this time he threw a lump of iron
on the fire, once more going out, and urging his brother, as he went,
to be specially careful this time, or he would spoil all.

Then in flew Loki and lighted between Brock's eyelids, stinging them
so that the blood poured down and blinded him. Raising his hand for a
second the dwarf dashed away the blood, and just for that instant he
ceased to blow. Presently Sindri was back again, saying gloomily that
what lay in the furnace came nigh to being spoilt. Then he put in his
hand and pulled out a great hammer; but the handle of the hammer was
an inch too short.

Now this hammer was so powerful that no one, not even a Frost Giant,
could resist its force, and it would smash a mountain as easily as it
would an egg-shell. So Brock, when he knew all that was to be known,
took the three gifts and hastened away to Asgard to pit them against
those of Loki, who had just returned.

Enthroned in a circle sat the Asas, and in the midst, as judges of the
gifts, sat Odin, Thor and Frey.

Loki of the red beard and cunning eye, bringing forward the magic
spear, bowed low to Odin, saying: "Here, brother Odin, is a spear that
will never miss its mark!"

Then he turned to Frey and handed him the magic ship, saying: "Here is
a ship which will never lack a fair wind wherever you wish to go; and
though you may fold it up and carry it in your pocket, it will hold
all the gods of Asgard and their steeds besides."

But to Thor he gave the golden web of hair, and said nothing, for he
feared him.

Then Brock stood forth and produced his treasures, saying: "Here,
mighty Odin, is a ring that will produce nine other gold rings every
ninth night."

Odin laughed with joy, and said: "Spears have I in abundance, but with
this ring I shall never want for gold."

Next Brock opened the heavy bag with which his shoulders were
burdened, and out of it fell the golden boar, which he laid before
Frey, saying: "Here, good Frey, is a boar who will carry you through
the air or over the sea. And wherever you go on his back the sky will
be lighted up by his golden bristles."

Then Frey laughed with joy, saying: "Better sport is it to ride on a
golden boar than in a ship."

Lastly Brock drew out the short-handled hammer named Mioelnir. And this
he gave to Thor, saying: "Most powerful one, here is a hammer whose
blows nothing can withstand, not even mountains or Frost Giants; and
however far you throw it, this hammer will always return to your
hand."

Then Thor jumped from his seat joyfully crying out: "Better than the
golden hair of Sif is a weapon against which none of my enemies can
stand. Brothers, let us decide this wager forthwith. And for me, I
give my vote in favour of the gifts of Brock."

Then the gods and goddesses put their heads together and came to the
conclusion that the hammer of Thor was worth all the gifts of Loki
twice over; for with it they could be protected against the Frost
Giants, who were always their secret dread. So they decided:

"Brock has won the wager. Let Loki lose his head."

Much dismayed, Red Loki offered to pay a huge ransom, but of this
Brock would not hear.

Then Loki pretended to give in. "Come and take me then," he cried, but
when the dwarf tried to seize him he was already far away, for he wore
the shoes with which he could run through the air and over the sea.

And knowing that he could never catch him, Brock was beside himself
with rage. Looking round him he saw that, though the others had
dispersed, Thor was still playing with his new hammer, smashing a
mountain here and a great tree there.

"Mighty Thor," cried the dwarf, "will you do something for me in
return for my gift? Bring to me that fellow who has broken his word,
that I may slay him forthwith."

With a nod of his great head Thor jumped into his goat chariot, and
was soon thundering through the air after wicked Loki. Driving with
the speed of lightning he quickly overtook the fugitive, whose plea
for help, however, touched him so that he relented and bethought him
of a way in which he might save his life.

Justice must be done, however, so he dragged the culprit back to
Asgard and gave him over to Brock; but he warned the dwarf that
although the head of Loki was rightfully his, he must not touch his
neck.

Now Brock could not possibly cut off the one without touching the
other, so he bethought him of another plan. He would at any rate sew
up the bragging lips that had caused so much trouble and told so many
lies since All Things began.

So he took a strong piece of string and bored holes with his auger,
and firmly stitched up the lips of Red Loki, and broke off the thread
at the end of the sewing.

For a time after this there was peace in Asgard, and this would have
lasted for long had not Loki managed at length to cut the string, when
he became as talkative as ever.

And this is the end of the tale of How Loki made a Wager with the
Dwarfs.




CHAPTER VII

The Apples of Youth

_This is the tale which the Northmen tell of how the Apples
of Youth were once very nearly lost to Asgard._


Sweetest of all the Asa folk was Idun, the fair young goddess of
Springtime and Youth, and dearly loved was she by the other Asas, both
for herself and for her magic apples.

Fast locked in a golden casket were her apples, ripe and sweet and
rosy. And each day, at dawn, Idun came to the table where the gods
sat and feasted together, and gave those who wished a taste of the
fruit.

And it came to pass that everyone who ate the magic fruit grew fresh
and young again, however old and weary he had been before. For even
the gods of Asgard grew old and weary sometimes; and then nothing
would make them young again but the Apples of Youth.

So Idun treasured the fruit with the greatest care, and never let it
out of her charge for a moment. And however many she took out of her
casket wherewith to feed the gods, there always remained just the same
number as before.

    "Bright Iduna, maid immortal!
    Standing at Valhalla's portal,
    In her casket has rich store
    Of rare apples, gilded o'er;
    Those rare apples, not of earth,
    To ageing Asas gave new birth."

It was only to be expected, of course, that the fame of this magic
fruit should spread, and as nobody liked to grow old, many of the
giants, as well as the little dwarf people, used to come to the gates
of Asgard and beg that Idun would give them a taste of her apples. But
this, though they offered her the richest gifts they could think of,
she never would do.

Now one day it so fell out that Odin grew weary of watching his heroes
feast and fight in Valhalla, and determined to go forth and seek an
adventure elsewhere.

So he called for his brother Hoenir, the clear-eyed Asa who first
gave hope to the heart of man, and Loki, the mischievous fellow who
yet by reason of his fun and gaiety was no bad travelling companion,
and bade them accompany him on a journey.

Speeding over the Rainbow Bridge they came down to the world below,
and presently found themselves in a desolate region of mountain and
moorland, through which they wandered for a long, long time, without
coming across any kind of human habitation.

At length, grown weary and very hungry, they began to look about for
food, and presently saw, to their great joy, a herd of oxen feeding
upon the mountain side. It took no long time to kill a fine bull and
to kindle an immense fire; after which the Asas hung up the animal to
roast and sat down to wait till it was done.

But though the fire flamed bravely over the logs, it made no
difference whatever to the meat, which remained raw and cold.

Heaping on fresh fuel, the three Asas put the carcass still nearer the
flame and waited hungrily. All in vain, the meat remained uneatable.

Looking at each other in dismay, the Asas exclaimed:

"There is some magic spell at work here."

And at that very moment they heard the loud croak of a bird in the
tree above them.

Hastily searching the branches, the Asas soon found an immense eagle
perched there and looking down upon them with an evil expression.

"Ho!" cried Odin, "is it you who has bewitched our food?"

The eagle nodded and croaked maliciously again.

"Then come at once and remove the spell," cried the famished Hoenir.

"If I do so, will you give me as much as I want to eat?" asked the
eagle.

At this Odin hesitated, for he feared a trick, but Loki's mouth was
watering, and he called out:

"Yes, yes, anything you like if you will only let the meat be cooked."

Then the great bird swooped down and began to fan the flame with his
huge wings, and behold! in a very few minutes the gravy began to run,
a delicious smell of roast beef filled the air, and there was the meat
done to a turn.

Just as the three Asas were putting out hungry hands to seize their
portions, however, the eagle, which had been hovering overhead,
swooped down and seized more than three-quarters of the animal,
leaving barely enough for one of the famished gods.

This was too much for Loki. With a roar of rage like that of an angry
lion, he seized a great stake that stood near and struck with all his
might at the greedy bird.

The eagle shook himself after the blow, but instead of dropping his
booty he rose slowly into the air. And then, to Loki's dismay, he
found that one end of the pole had stuck fast to the body of the bird,
the other to his own hands.

Try as he would he could not let go, and so found himself being
dragged along over stones and bushes and briers, while his arms were
almost torn out of their sockets.

In vain he begged and implored the eagle to let him go; it took no
notice of him whatever, but flew on and on, just a little way above
the earth, until at length Loki, feeling that he could endure no
longer, promised to give him anything he asked if he would only
release him.

Then at last the eagle spoke, telling him that he would set him free
on one condition only, and that was that he should manage, by some
trick, to tempt Idun out of Asgard, in order that he could obtain
possession of her and of the magic fruit. He told Loki, moreover, that
he was the Storm Giant Thiassi in disguise, and bade him beware of the
consequences if he broke his solemn promise to one of giant race.

By this time Loki was ready to promise anything to save his life, and
so at length he found himself free.

Bruised and torn he made his way back to Odin and Hoenir, by whom he
was closely questioned concerning his adventures.

But Loki never hesitated to depart from the truth, and, knowing that
it would not do to tell what he had promised, he answered glibly that
the eagle had captured him in mistake for someone else, and that when
he found out it was Red Loki himself, he had set him free, with many
expressions of sorrow for his error.

So the three Asas returned to Asgard, and from that moment Loki did
not cease to plot and plan the means by which he could entice Idun
outside the gates.

And indeed this was no easy matter, for the Apples of Youth were so
precious to the gods that Idun was well guarded by night and day.
Sometimes, however, even the Asas were off their guard, and that was
the opportunity for Loki.

Strolling one day through the groves of Asgard, Loki found the
beautiful maiden all alone in a sunny corner playing at ball with her
golden fruit.

"Aha!" cried he, approaching gently so as not to startle her, "what a
fair game thou playest here, maiden!"

But Idun only smiled at him happily and went on tossing her apples.

Then Loki pulled a long face, and came nearer, and said:

"Till this day, fair Idun, I had said that nowhere in the wide world
grew apples like thine. But now have I found a tree whereon the fruit
is of finer gold, and of greater size than these, and a taste of it
needs not to be renewed again, but makes one young for evermore."

Then Idun stopped playing and her blue eyes grew dark and stormy, for
she could not bear to think that her apples would no longer be the joy
and delight of the Asas.

But then she remembered Loki's deceitful ways, and said: "I believe
thee not. This is one of thy tricks, Red Loki."

"Ho, you think so, do you?" said the crafty one. "Then come and see
them for yourself, and bring your own to compare with them."

"Are they near by?" said Idun, rising doubtfully to her feet, and
still holding fast to the casket of fruit.

"Only just a little way off," replied Loki, and taking hold of her
hand he drew her outside the thicket.

On and on they went, and when she asked where they were going he
always replied that the grove where the apples grew was just a little
farther than he had thought.

At length, without noticing that she had passed the boundaries, Idun
stood outside the walls of Asgard on a dreary region of barren heath,
and then she at last began to suspect mischief.

"Where am I?" she cried, "and where, O Loki, are the golden apples?"

But she only heard the jeering ha! ha! ha! of the Asa as he returned
to Asgard, and that was soon lost in the _whirr-r-r_ of wings as a
mighty eagle, swooping down upon her, fixed his talons in her girdle
and rose with her into the air.

And this, of course, was Thiassi, the Storm Giant, who had been on the
watch for her all the time, and who now carried her off, casket and
all, to the bleak and desolate abode over which he ruled. Well had it
been said that Loki was at the bottom of all the misfortunes that ever
befell in Asgard. And never until the End of All Things would he work
so dire a mischief again.

Poor Idun grew pale and thin and sad in her captivity, but she would
not purchase freedom with a taste of the Apples of Youth, although the
Storm Giant coaxed and begged and threatened by turns.

For a time the Asas took little notice of her absence, for they
thought she was amusing herself somewhere in the sunny groves of
Asgard and had forgotten her daily visit. Then they began to feel old
and weary, and at first scarcely knew what was wrong.

Glancing at each other they saw, with startled eyes, wrinkles and
lines and grey hairs where these things were not wont to be. Their
youth and beauty were disappearing, and then they suddenly awoke to
the need of a thorough search for the missing Idun.

And, when she could nowhere be found, All-Father Odin, mindful of
former tricks, sent for Red Loki and began very closely to question
him. Others had seen Idun in his company on that eventful day when she
had been carried away, and so, finding it impossible to keep the
matter hidden, Loki confessed, with a mocking laugh, that he had
betrayed her into the power of the Storm Giant.

Then all the Asas arose in hot wrath and threatened Loki with death or
torture if he did not at once restore the beautiful Goddess of Youth
with her magic fruit. And at length, being fairly frightened, he
undertook to bring her back, if Freya would lend him her falcon plumes
that he might disguise himself as a bird.

Thus equipped, Loki flew off to Giantland, and arrived, fortunately
for him, just as Thiassi had gone out a-fishing.

High up at the window of a great stone castle fair Idun looked with
tearful eyes upon the stormy sea, and, as she thought of the sunny
groves of Asgard, suddenly the plumage of a great falcon almost
brushed against her face. Drawing back in alarm, she saw the cunning
red eyes of Loki looking at her from the bird's head.

"See how kind am I!" he jeered. "I am come to take thee back to
Asgard."

Then Idun almost wept for joy, till she remembered that she was a
prisoner, and so cried pitifully:

"I cannot win forth from this cold stone tower, O Loki, and even if I
could, thou canst never carry me and my casket back to Asgard. And
lo! I cannot outrun the wicked Storm Giant, and though the fruit be
heavy, I will not leave it behind."

Then Loki soothed her, and by his magic arts he changed her into a
nut, which he took up in one talon, while the casket he carried with
the other, and so set off to fly back to Asgard.

Now Thiassi, the Storm Giant, was ill at ease that day, for he felt
the pangs and pains of old age upon him as he went a-fishing. So he
determined to return earlier than usual, in order to try once more to
get the magic fruit from Idun.

Judge then of his dismay when he found his prisoner flown!

Hastily transforming himself into an eagle, Thiassi began to scour the
regions of the air, looking everywhere for the maiden, and before long
he noted the steady flight of a falcon towards the walls of Asgard.

Sweeping towards him through the air, the keen eyes of the eagle saw
the gleam of a golden casket in his talons, and he knew that it was an
Asa who had come to the rescue of Idun.

And now it seemed that Loki would be hard put to it to reach Asgard
before he was overtaken; for the eagle swept through the air with his
great wings much faster than the falcon could fly, and the Asas, who
had assembled on the battlements of the city to watch the race,
trembled for its issue.

Then some of them remembered how once before they had played a trick
upon the pursuer in a similar conflict, and they collected pine
shavings in great abundance and piled them on the walls, and stood
ready to fire them when the moment came.

On, on flew Loki, hard beset; and close behind him came, with steady
rush, the mighty eagle Thiassi. He was almost upon his prey as they
neared the walls, but Loki made a last violent effort, which was
successful, and he fell exhausted into the midst of the Asas.

At the same moment the pile of fuel was lighted, and Thiassi, blinded
with smoke and singed with flame, dropped over the battlements, and
thus fell an easy prey to his waiting enemies. In admiration of his
good race, however, the Asas placed his eyes as stars in the heavens,
and there they shine to this day.

So the Apples of Youth returned to Asgard, and all the Asas hastened
to eat of them and became young and beautiful again. And fair Idun
once more resumed her shape, and never again was tricked by wicked
Loki, but played with her magic fruit in the golden groves of Asgard
till the End of All Things.

And this is how the Apples of Youth were once very nearly lost to
Asgard.




CHAPTER VIII

How the Fenris Wolf was Chained

_This is the tale the Northmen tell of
how the Fenris Wolf was chained._


Fair as were the meads of Asgard, we have seen that the Asa folk were
fond of wandering far afield in other regions. Most restless of all
was Red Loki, that cunning fellow who was always bringing trouble upon
himself or upon his kindred. And because he loved evil, he would often
betake himself to the gloomy halls of Giantland and mingle with the
wicked folk of that region.

Now one day he met a hideous giantess named Angur-Boda. This creature
had a heart of ice, and because he loved ugliness and evil she had a
great attraction for him, and in the end he married her, and they
lived together in a horrible cave in Giantland.

Three children were born to Loki and Angur-Boda in this dread abode,
and they were even more terrible in appearance than their mother. The
first was an immense wolf called Fenris, with a huge mouth filled with
long white teeth, which he was constantly gnashing together.

The second was a wicked-looking serpent with a fiery-tongue lolling
from its mouth.

The third was a hideous giantess, partly blue and partly flesh-colour,
whose name was Hela.

No sooner were these three terrible children born than all the wise
men of the earth began to foretell the misery they would bring upon
the Asa folk.

In vain did Loki try to keep them hidden within the cave wherein
their mother dwelt. They soon grew so immense in size that no dwelling
would contain them, and all the world began to talk of their frightful
appearance.

It was not long, of course, before All-Father Odin, from his high seat
in Asgard, heard of the children of Loki. So he sent for some of the
Asas, and said:

"Much evil will come upon us, O my children, from this giant brood, if
we defend not ourselves against them. For their mother will teach them
wickedness, and still more quickly will they learn the cunning wiles
of their father. Fetch me them here, therefore, that I may deal with
them forthwith."

So, after somewhat of a struggle, the Asas captured the three
giant-children and brought them before Odin's judgment-seat.

Then Odin looked first at Hela, and when he saw her gloomy eyes, full
of misery and despair, he was sorry, and dealt kindly with her,
saying: "Thou art the bringer of Pain to man, and Asgard is no place
for such as thou. But I will make thee ruler of the Mist Home, and
there shalt thou rule over that unlighted world, the Region of the
Dead."

Forthwith he sent her away over rough roads to the cold, dark region
of the North called the Mist Home. And there did Hela rule over a grim
crew, for all those who had done wickedness in the world above were
imprisoned by her in those gloomy regions. To her came also all those
who had died, not on the battlefield, but of old age or disease. And
though these were treated kindly enough, theirs was a joyless life in
comparison with that of the dead warriors who were feasting and
fighting in the halls of Valhalla, under the kindly rule of All-Father
Odin.

Having thus disposed of Hela, Odin next turned his attention to the
serpent. And when he saw his evil tongue and cunning, wicked eyes, he
said:

"Thou art he who bringest Sin into the world of men; therefore the
ocean shall be thy home for ever."

Then he threw that horrid serpent into the deep sea which surrounds
all lands, and there the creature grew so fast that when he stretched
himself one day he encircled all the earth, and held his own tail fast
in his mouth. And sometimes he grew angry to think that he, the son of
a god, had thus been cast out; and at those times he would writhe with
his huge body and lash his tail till the sea spouted up to the sky.
And when that happened the men of the North said that a great tempest
was raging. But it was only the Serpent-son of Loki writhing in his
wrath.

Then Odin turned to the third child. And behold! the Fenris Wolf was
so appalling to look upon that Odin feared to cast him forth, and he
decided to endeavour to tame him by kindness so that he should not
wish them ill.

But when he bade them carry food to the Fenris Wolf, not one of the
Asas would do so, for they feared a snap from his great jaws. Only the
brave Tyr had courage enough to feed him, and the wolf ate so much and
so fast that the business took him all his time. Meantime, too, the
Fenris grew so rapidly, and became so fierce, that the gods were
compelled to take counsel and consider how they should get rid of him.
They remembered that it would make their peaceful halls unholy if they
were to slay him, and so they resolved instead to bind him fast, that
he should be unable to do them harm.

So those of the Asa folk who were clever smiths set to work and made a
very strong, thick chain; and when it was finished they carried it out
to the yard where the wolf dwelt, and said to him, as though in jest:

"Here is a fine proof of thy boasted strength, O Fenris. Let us bind
this about thee, that we may see if thou canst break it asunder."

Then the wolf gave a great grin with his wide jaws, and came and stood
still that they might bind the chain about him; for he knew what he
could do. And it came to pass that directly they had fastened the
chain, and had slipped aside from him, the great beast gave himself a
shake, and the chain fell about him in little bits.

At this the Asas were much annoyed, but they tried not to show it, and
praised him for his strength.

Then they set to work again upon a chain much stronger than the last,
and brought it to the Fenris Wolf, saying:

"Great will be thy renown, O Fenris, if thou canst break this chain as
thou didst the last."

But the wolf looked at them askance, for the chain they brought was
very much thicker than the one he had already broken. He reflected,
however, that since that time he himself had grown stronger and
bigger, and moreover, that one must risk something in order to win
renown.

So he let them put the chain upon him, and when the Asas said that all
was ready, he gave a good shake and stretched himself a few times, and
again the fetters lay in fragments on the ground.

Then the gods began to fear that they would never hold the wolf in
bonds; and it was All-Father Odin who persuaded them to make one more
attempt.

So they sent a messenger to Dwarfland bidding him ask the Little Men
to make a chain which nothing could possibly destroy.

Setting at once to work, the clever little smiths soon fashioned a
slender silken rope, and gave it to the messenger, saying that no
strength could break it, and that the more it was strained the
stronger it would become.

It was made of the most mysterious things--the sound of a cat's
footsteps, the roots of a mountain, the sinews of a bear, the breath
of fishes, and other such strange materials, which only the dwarfs
knew how to use.

With this chain the messenger hastened back over the Rainbow Bridge to
Asgard.

By this time the Fenris Wolf had grown too big for his yard, so he
lived on a rocky island in the middle of the lake that lies in the
midst of Asgard. And here the Asas now betook themselves with their
chain, and began to play their part with wily words.

"See," they cried, "O Fenris! Here is a cord so soft and thin that
none would think of it binding such strength as thine."

And they laughed great laughs, and handed it to one another, and tried
its strength by pulling at it with all their might, but it did not
break.

Then they came nearer and used more wiles, saying:

"We cannot break the cord, though 'tis stronger than it looks, but
thou, O mighty one, will be able to snap it in a moment."

But the wolf tossed his head in scorn, and said:

"Small renown would there be to me, O Asa folk, if I were to break yon
slender string. Save, therefore, your breath, and leave me now alone."

"Aha!" cried the Asas. "Thou fearest the might of the silken cord,
thou false one, and that is why thou wilt not let us bind thee!"

"Not I," said the Fenris Wolf, growing rather suspicious, "but if it
is made with craft and guile it shall never come near my feet."

"But," said the Asas, "thou wilt surely be able to break this silken
cord with ease, since thou hast already broken the great iron
fetters."

To this the wolf made no answer, pretending not to hear.

"Come!" said the Asas again, "why shouldst thou fear? For even if thou
couldst not break the cord we would immediately let thee free again.
To refuse is a coward's piece of work."

Then the wolf gnashed his teeth at them in anger, and said:

"Well I know you Asas! For if you bind me so fast that I cannot get
loose you will skulk away, and it will be long before I get any help
from you; and therefore am I loth to let this band be laid upon me."

But still the Asas continued to persuade him and to twit him with
cowardice, until at length the Fenris Wolf said, with a sullen growl:

"Have it your own way then. But, as a pledge that this is done without
deceit, let one of you lay his hand in my mouth while you are binding
me, and afterwards while I try to break the bonds."

Then the Asa folk looked at one another in dismay, for they knew very
well what this would mean.

And while they consulted together the wolf stood gnashing his teeth at
them with a horrid grin.

At length Tyr the Brave hesitated no longer. Boldly he stalked up to
the wolf and thrust his arm into his enormous mouth, bidding the Asas
bind fast the beast. Scarce had they done so when the wolf began to
strain and pull, but the more he did so the tighter and suffer the
rope became.

The gods shouted and laughed with glee when they saw how all his
efforts were in vain. But Tyr did not join in their mirth, for the
wolf in his rage snapped his great teeth together and bit off his hand
at the wrist.

Now when the Asas discovered that the animal was fast bound, they took
the chain which was fixed to the rope and drew it through a huge
rock, and fastened this rock deep down in the earth, so that it could
never be moved. And this they fastened to another great rock which was
driven still deeper into the ground.

When the Fenris Wolf found that he had been thus secured he opened his
mouth terribly wide, and twisted himself right and left, and tried his
best to bite the Asa folk. He uttered, moreover, such terrible howls
that at length the gods could bear it no longer. So they took a sword
and thrust it into his mouth, so that the hilt rested on his lower,
and the point against his upper jaw. And there he was doomed to remain
until the end of All Things shall come, when he

    "Freed from the Chain
    Shall range the Earth."




CHAPTER IX

How the Pride of Thor was Brought low

_This is the tale the Northmen tell of how the
Pride of Thor was once brought low._


From the sunny heights of Asgard the Asa folk were wont to look upon
the earth and to take pleasure in its welfare and in the happiness of
its people. But all too often they saw with dismay that the Frost
Giants from their cold Northern home of ice and snow sent forth cruel
blasts which nipped the buds, withered the flowers of spring, and
saddened the hearts of men. So, one day, that mighty Asa who is called
Thor determined to go forth and teach these Giant folk how to behave
themselves better. Calling for his chariot of brass, which was drawn
by two mighty goats, from whose teeth and hoofs sparks continually
flew, he was about to drive away, when Red Loki came running up and
begged to be taken too.

To this Thor agreed, for he had rather a liking for Loki, in spite of
his mischievous tricks, and in a few minutes they were hurtling
through the air at a great rate.

All day long they drove, and at evening time reached the borders of
Giantland, where stood the hut of a poor peasant. Seeing this, the two
Asas determined to try to obtain shelter for the night.

The peasant was a good-hearted fellow, and gladly welcomed them under
his roof; but he had only a bit of black bread to offer them for
supper, and this was by no means a satisfactory meal for two hungry
gods.

But Thor was quite equal to the occasion.

"Fear not," said he kindly, "I will provide meat in plenty for you and
your family as well as for ourselves."

Then he went out, killed his two goats, cut them up and threw them
into a great cauldron, which the peasant's wife, at his request, had
set to boil upon the fire. The skins, meantime, he spread with care
upon the floor.

The stew was soon cooked to perfection, whereupon Thor invited the man
and his wife and children to eat as much as they would.

"Be careful, however," said he, "not to break a single bone, but to
throw them all into the skins spread out on the floor."

This they promised to do, but during the meal Red Loki, wishing to see
what would happen if they disobeyed, persuaded the boy, Thialfi, the
peasant's son, to break one of the bones in order to suck out the
marrow, saying that no one could possibly know that he had done so.
Then they lay down to sleep, the bones of the animals wrapped in the
goat skins being upon the floor.

Next morning, just before daybreak, Thor arose, and, having stretched
himself, took up his mighty hammer and gave the goat skins a tap.
Immediately the goats sprang up, as much alive as ever they were, and
perfectly well, save that one of them limped.

Then Thor knew at once that his commands had been disobeyed, and the
whole household soon knew it too. His brows sank over his eyes, and he
grasped his hammer so hard that his knuckles grew white. The terrified
peasant fell down on his face before him; and when Thor lifted the
hammer to destroy him the whole household wept aloud and begged for
mercy, promising to give him all they had in the world as an
atonement.

When Thor saw their terror, his anger left him, and he agreed to take
as a ransom the children of the peasant, a boy and girl, called
Thialfi and Roskva. And they became his servants, and have been always
in his company since that time.

Leaving his goats in charge of the peasant, Thor went forward towards
Giantland, accompanied by Loki and the two children; and the boy
Thialfi, who was the fleetest of foot of all living creatures, carried
Thor's bag.

After walking all day through a bleak and barren country wrapped in a
thick mist, they came at nightfall to a great wood, which seemed to
offer neither provisions, nor roof to shelter under for the night.

At length, after searching about for a very long time, they came to
what seemed to be a large hall of misty and uncertain shape, the door
of which was as wide as the whole building.

So they entered, and, finding everything within empty and dark, they
determined to go no farther, and stretched themselves, hungry and
weary as they were, upon the ground.

In the middle of the night they were awakened by what seemed to be a
great earthquake. The earth trembled beneath them and the house shook.

Calling upon his companions, Thor arose, and fearing lest the roof
should fall upon them he drew them into an inner room and, seating
himself in the doorway, took up his hammer and prepared to defend
himself and them, if anything should befall. But nothing further
happened save a renewed trembling of the ground and a curious,
regularly recurring sound, like a loud groan or roar.

When it began to grow light Thor went out and saw, not far off, a huge
giant lying on the ground fast asleep; and he understood that it was
his snores which had caused the ground to shake and which had sounded
like a roar or groan.

Suddenly the giant awoke and sprang up, so quickly that Loki and the
children, who had followed Thor, jumped behind a tree. But Thor, who
was afraid of nothing, only grasped his hammer tightly and asked his
name.

"I am called Skrymir," said the giant, looking down at him, and,
catching sight of his hammer, of which all in heaven and earth had
heard, he went on: "I don't need to ask _your_ name, for I see you are
Thor. But what have you done with my glove?"

As he said these last words, he stretched out a huge hand and picked
up his glove, which Thor, to his great astonishment, found to be the
house in which he had spent the night; and the inner room was the
place for the thumb.

Hearing that they were on their way towards Giantland, Skrymir asked
if he might accompany them; and as he seemed a good-natured fellow
they agreed. But first they sat down to eat their breakfast.

Skrymir ate his huge meal out of a great provision sack, and eyed with
much merriment the wallet which held the food of Thor and his
companions.

"'Tis like a little toy," said he; but Thialfi answered crossly:

"Toy it may be to you, but it has made my shoulders ache very finely,
I can tell you. I could hardly sleep all night for the pain."

Then Skrymir laughed, and took the bag and put it into his sack,
slinging the whole over his shoulder as if it had been a
feather-weight.

After this they all set off together, and that day they covered an
immense distance, for the giant took such huge strides that they had
to run the whole time in order to keep up with him.

When it grew dark, Skrymir led them into a vast wood where no
habitation was to be found, and bade them take up their quarters under
a huge oak. The others were weary and hungry beyond words, for they
had not stopped all day either to eat or rest; but Skrymir seemed only
sleepy, and was preparing to begin his snores when Loki, whom fasting
had put decidedly out of temper, sharply reminded him that they had
had no supper. Pushing the great sack over to them, the giant sleepily
replied that they were welcome to all that it contained, and
immediately fell into a deep slumber.

But when Loki tried to undo the mouth of the sack he could not get one
knot loosened, nor could he even get one of the strings to stir. Then
Thor tried with all his strength, but could do nothing. This was a
serious matter, for they were all starving with hunger by this time;
so Thor, in a great rage, snatched up his hammer in both hands,
stepped up to where Skrymir was lying and dashed the hammer, with all
his force, at his head.

At this blow, which would have smashed the skull of most men, the
giant drowsily opened one eye, saying: "Did a leaf fall on my head
just now? Good-night to all of you. I suppose you have now had your
supper and are going to bed."

At this the Asas were so astonished that they meekly replied that they
were just going to do that very thing. And they went and lay down
under another oak. But there was no sleep for them, for, besides their
fear and hunger, the whole wood resounded with the giant's snores, so
that it seemed as though it thundered all the time.

At last Thor could stand it no longer, so he went over to him, and
swinging his hammer with all his skill brought it down with such a
crash that he knew by the feel of it that it had sunk deep into the
head.

But the giant only turned over, saying sleepily: "What was that? Did
an acorn fall upon my head? How is it with you, friend Thor?"

Then Thor answered hastily that he had only just waked up, and that it
was midnight and still time to sleep.

The god was now alarmed, and he decided that, if it were possible, he
would get in a third blow which should put an end altogether to the
most extraordinary companion he had ever had.

So he lay watching for Skrymir to go fast asleep again, and shortly
before daybreak his chance came.

Creeping up, he clutched the hammer with all his might and dashed it
at the giant's temples with such force that it sank up to the handle.

Scarcely had he time to pull it out again than Skrymir sat up and
began to yawn, rubbing his eyes and stroking his temples and saying:

"Are there any birds sitting in the tree above me? I thought, as I
woke up, that some moss from the branches fell upon my head. Ho,
there! Thor, are you awake? You seem to be moving early this morning.
Let us all get up and continue our journey, for we are now not far
from Giant Town."

Filled with astonished dismay at the failure of his attempts, Thor
roused his companions, and all set off, hungry and dispirited, at the
giant's heels. Presently they began to whisper together as to the
events of the night, and of the enormous strength and size of their
companion, but after awhile Skrymir looked down at them and said:

"We have now come to two ways; mine goes to the north where you see
yon mountains; yours, if you still wish to reach Giant Town, lies
there to the east. So here we part company, but first let me give you
some useful advice.

"I have heard you whispering to one another that I am not small of
stature; but when you come to Giant Town you will see greater folk
still. So do not brag too much of your own powers, for the Giant folk
will not put up with the boasting of such insignificant little fellows
as you be.

"But if you want to be quite wise, turn back now to your own place,
for that is the best thing you can do."

So saying, Skrymir shouldered his great sack and, turning his back
upon them, went off through the forest with such huge strides that he
was soon lost to sight.

Now Loki was much disposed to follow the advice of the giant and turn
back to Asgard, but of this Thor would not hear. So they continued
their journey until noonday, when they saw before them a great town
standing in the midst of an immense plain. The walls and gates of the
town were so high that they had to bend their necks right back before
they could see to the top of them, and when they came nearer still
they found the gate was fast shut.

But this gate had bars, and was made to keep in the Giant folk, not to
keep out smaller people, of whose visits they had never thought. So
the two Asas and their servants found little difficulty in creeping
through the bars, and so getting into the town.

The first thing they saw was a great hall, towards which they went,
and finding the door open they entered, and saw in the centre of it
two benches, enormously high and wide, upon which sat a number of
giants. In their midst, upon a platform high as the roof of an
ordinary house, sat the King of the Giants, to whom they advanced and
made their bows. At first the King looked about on the floor as though
they were too small for him to see, but at length he cast a scornful
glance upon them, and with a grin that showed all his teeth, said:

"Is this little fellow the great god Thor, of whom we have heard so
much? Perhaps, however, you are bigger in strength than in size. Now,
for what feats are you and your companions prepared? For you must know
this, that no one is allowed to stay here unless he be more skilled
in some craft or accomplishment than any other man."

At this Red Loki, who was so dreadfully hungry that he scarcely knew
what he was saying, called out: "I know what I can do better than
anyone else! I will soon prove that there is no one present who can
eat his food faster than I can."

Then said the King of the Giants: "That is a feat to be proud of, if
you speak the truth, and you shall try it immediately."

So he called from the bench a man called Logi, and bade him come out
on the floor and try his strength against Loki.

The others took a huge trough full of meat and set it on the floor,
and they put Logi at one end and Loki at the other.

Both of them ate as fast as they possibly could, and met in the middle
of the trough. But though Loki had such an immense appetite, and had
eaten every scrap of meat off the bones, Logi had eaten up the flesh
and the bones and the trough as well.

So Loki had to confess that he had been beaten.

Then the Giant-King looked at the boy Thialfi and asked: "What use is
that lad in heaven or earth?"

And Thialfi answered that he would run faster than anyone whom the
Giant-King liked to name.

"That is a good feat," said the King, "but it is to be hoped you can
run _really_ fast, for you will have something to do to win this
race."

So saying he took them outside, where there was an excellent
racecourse along the flat plain; and he called up a young man, whose
name was Hugi, and bade him run a race with Thialfi.

In the first heat of that race, although Hugi ran so fast, yet, when
he turned to run back, he met Thialfi face to face. Then the King of
the Giants encouraged the lad, saying: "Never before has come anyone
hither who was swifter of foot than you."

Then they ran the second heat, and when Hugi reached the goal, Thialfi
was three quarters of the way thither.

Then said the giant: "Well run, Thialfi; yet I do not think that you
will win this race. However, we shall see what happens in the third
heat."

When this was run, Hugi had reached the goal and turned back again ere
poor Thialfi was barely halfway there.

At this all the giants began to applaud Hugi, saying that he had
fairly won the race; and Thialfi was obliged to go sadly away.

The King of the Giants next inquired what feats Thor could show to
prove the truth of the tales men told of his great strength; and the
Asa, who was now very thirsty, and at all times a mighty man at the
bowl, said that he would drink deeper than anyone in the whole world.

So they returned to the hall, where the King called upon his
cup-bearer to bring the horn out of which his valiant giants drank;
and this was filled with ale and handed to Thor.

Then said the King of the Giants: "With us 'tis thought that the man
is a good drinker who empties this horn at one draught; he who takes
it off in two is but moderately thirsty; but he who cannot empty it in
three is but a wretched drinker, and not worthy of the name."

Thor looked at the horn, and thinking within himself: "This is not a
difficult task, for the horn, though it seems deep, is not very
large," took a drink which he quite thought would have drained the
vessel. But when he could drink no longer, for lack of breath, he
looked in the horn, and there was the ale still brimming over the
edge.

Then the giant chuckled and said: "Well drunk, good Thor, but you have
by no means emptied the horn. It seems to me, indeed, that men have
boasted too much of your fine deeds. I would not have believed that
you would have taken so long to drink up the ale. However, I don't
doubt you will finish it at the second draught."

Thor reddened with wrath at these scoffing words, and took up the
horn, intending to drink the ale to the last dregs. But, try as he
would, he could not get the end of the horn to tip up completely, and
when he set it down it seemed to him that he had drunk less than at
the first time. Yet some difference had been made, for the horn could
now be carried without spilling.

"Ha! ha!" laughed the giant. "Is this your skill, good Thor? Are you
not leaving rather much for your third draught? It looks to me as if
that will have to be the greatest of them all."

Then Thor got very angry indeed, and, setting the horn to his mouth,
drank with all his might and main, so that when he could do no more
and had set it down again, the ale had certainly grown less.

"Ha! ha!" roared the giant. "They think too highly of you in the world
above, my little Thor. Now what other game would you like to try?"

"Whatever you like," answered Thor very grumpily, for none of the Asas
liked being laughed at.

So the giant said: "Young lads here think it nothing but play to lift
my cat up from the ground, and I should never have suggested such a
feat to the strength of Asa Thor had I not discovered that he is much
less of a man than I thought."

Then he called: "Puss! Puss!" in a voice that shook the house; upon
which an enormous grey cat sprang forth on the floor before them.

Rather annoyed at being asked to do such an easy thing, Thor went over
to the animal, put his arm round it and tried to lift it up. But the
more he tugged and strained the more the cat arched its back, so that
his strength was exerted vainly; and in the end, when he was black in
the face with the efforts he had made, he had only succeeded in
lifting up one paw.

Then the giant repeated his scornful laugh, saying: "That's just as I
expected. The cat is rather large, and Thor is small--tiny, indeed,
compared with the great men who are here with us."

"Tiny, indeed!" roared Thor, in great wrath. "Let anyone you like come
and wrestle with me and I will show you if my strength is as tiny as
you seem to think."

At this the giant pretended to look about him on the benches, saying:
"I don't see anyone here who would not think it beneath him to wrestle
with such a puny fellow. Let me see! Let me see! Ah! call hither my
old nurse, Elli, and let Thor wrestle with her if he wants to. She has
thrown to the ground before now men who thought themselves as strong
as this little Thor."

At his call there came into the hall an old woman--so old that Thor
refused at first to close with her. But the giants mocked him so that
at length he seized her round the waist. Yet the tighter he grasped
her the firmer she stood. At length she began to grip him in her turn.
Thor lost his footing almost at once and, though he wrestled
valiantly, she brought him on to his knee.

At this the giant interfered, saying that no more was necessary to
show who was the stronger, and that it was getting too late for any
more such contests. Then he bade them seat themselves at supper, and
after a royal feast conducted them to their beds with the kindest
hospitality. But Thor spent all that night in bitterness, for his
pride had been brought very low.

At daybreak next morning the Asas and their companions arose and
prepared to depart. Before they set out, however, their host appeared
on the scene and insisted upon their eating a hearty breakfast, after
which he offered to show them the most direct way out of the city.

As they set out, the Giant-King grew strangely silent and thoughtful
and did not speak to them until they stood outside the gates. Then as
they were about to bid him farewell, he suddenly asked Thor how he
thought his journey had turned out.

To this Thor, deeply humbled and mortified by all that had occurred,
said that he felt much disgraced at the knowledge that henceforth the
giants would call him a man of little account. But to his intense
surprise the giant shook his head, saying: "Had I my way, you should
never enter this city again, and if I had known before how strong you
were, you should never have come into it, for you have very nearly
brought utter ruin upon us all.

"Know then, first of all, that I have deceived you with magical
delusions the whole time. For I was that giant Skrymir who met you in
the woods, and who tied up the mouth of the provision sack with
invisible iron threads, so that you could not unloose it.

"That same night you struck with your hammer three great blows upon my
head, the least of which would have made an end of me if it had hit
me. But in the darkness I managed each time to bring a mountain
between me and your hammer without your seeing it; and if you want to
see the marks you made in it you have but to look at that mountain
above my city, with its top cloven into three great dales.

"Next, when you came to my hall, Loki contested with Logi, my
courtier, as to who should eat the fastest. But he whose name was Logi
is really _Fire_, and in consequence he could eat up trough and bones
and all in no time. When Thialfi ran his race, he ran against Hugi,
who is no other than _Thought_, and no one, of course, can run as fast
as he.

"When you yourself drank from that horn, then indeed was seen a marvel
which I should never have thought possible. You did not see that one
end of the horn stood in the sea, which you were drinking all the
time. And when you reach the shore you will see how much the sea has
ebbed by your draughts.

"Nor was it less marvellous to me that you lifted up the paw of the
cat. For that cat was none other than the Serpent which lies around
the whole earth with its tail in its mouth. When it took the form of a
cat you lifted it so that it was obliged to arch itself almost up to
the sky; and then we all trembled, for we feared that you would pull
it altogether out of the sea.

"Your struggle with Elli was perhaps the most amazing of all. For she
is _Old Age_, of whom none has ever got the better.

"And now depart, O Asa folk, and 'twill be better for us both if we
never see each other again."

Now when Thor heard how he had been tricked, he grasped his hammer
with intent to dash both the giant and his city in pieces. But when he
looked for them, both had disappeared, and he found himself standing
with his companions in the midst of a large plain, on which was no
sign of habitation.

Then he knew that the power of the Giant folk would not yield to
force, and thinking of their strange adventures Thor and his
companions returned to Asgard.




CHAPTER X

How Thor's Hammer was Lost and Found

_This is the tale the Northmen tell of how
Thor's Hammer was lost and found._


Most precious in the eyes of Thor was his magic hammer, Mioelnir, of
which even the mighty Frost Giants stood in dread.

Always he laid it by his side when he went to rest, and always it was
the first thing for which his hand was outstretched when he awoke.
Judge then of his horror and dismay when, on opening his eyes one
morning, the hammer was nowhere to be seen.

Starting up with a roar of rage, Thor commenced to search everywhere
for the missing weapon. Up and down his wonderful palace, built of the
thunder clouds, he tramped, with a noise that shook the whole city of
Asgard. But the hammer was not to be found.

Then he called upon golden-haired Sif, his wife, and bade her help in
the search; and still the hammer was nowhere to be seen. It was clear
that someone must have stolen it, and, when he realised this, Thor's
wrath broke all bounds. His bristling red hair and beard stood up on
end, and from them flew a whole volley of fiery sparks.

Presently, as the angry Asa was shaking the palace with his thunderous
voice, Red Loki came along to inquire into the trouble. He was not
likely to sympathise with Thor, but, always brimful of curiosity, he
loved to have a part in everything that happened.

"What's the matter, Asa Thor?" said he; and Thor replied, lowering his
voice as he spoke, for he did not want his loss to be too widely
known:

"Now listen to what I tell thee, Loki--'tis a thing which is known
neither on earth below nor in heaven above. My hammer's gone."

This news was most interesting to Loki, who had long owed Thor a
grudge, which he was afraid to pay openly. "Ho, ho!" said he. "Then
shall we soon have the giants turning us out of Asgard, brother Thor."

"Not if you use your wits as you know how," growled Thor, still in a
very bad temper. "Come, you call yourself a clever fellow. Find out
for me who has robbed me of my thunderbolt, my hammer, my Mioelnir."

Then Loki gave a grin and a wink, and promised to do what he
could--not because he cared for Thor, but because he loved to be of
importance, and was, moreover, really frightened as to what might
happen to Asgard if the magic hammer was not at hand.

It was not long before he noticed that an extraordinary kind of
tempest was raging in the regions below--not an orderly kind of
tempest, with first some thunder, and then some rain, and then a gust
of wind or two, such as Thor was wont to arrange, but a mixture of
hail and wind and thunder and lightning and rain and snow, all raging
together in a tremendous muddle, so that the earth folk thought the
end of the world was come.

This gave Loki a hint, and he began to peer about between the clouds,
until at length he saw that the trouble was coming from a certain hill
which stood in the centre of Giantland.

Now on the top of this hill lived a certain Thrym, prince of the Frost
Giants, who for a long time past had been very envious of the might of
Thor. He had, indeed, done his best to imitate him as far as he could,
and had managed to get up a very good imitation of lightning and hail
and rain; but he had not been able to manage the thunderbolts, for
they could only be made by means of Thor's hammer, Mioelnir.

All this was well known to Red Loki, and he was therefore not at all
surprised to find that, somehow or other, Thrym must have got hold of
the magic weapon; for here were thunderbolts crashing about the earth
and sky at a terrible rate.

When informed of the discovery, Thor flew into a still more tremendous
rage, and wanted to rush off at once to try conclusions with the
giant. But Loki, who loved rather to get a thing by trickery and
deceit, persuaded him that violence would never do.

"Remember," said he, "that Thrym _with_ the hammer is much stronger
than Thor without it. This is a matter which must be managed by clever
wit and craft, not by force and loud talking. Leave therefore the
whole matter to me."

To this Thor very reluctantly agreed.

Then Loki bethought him of some disguise wherein he might visit
Giantland in safety, for he was not at all anxious to risk his life.
He betook himself to the House of Maidens, over which ruled Freya,
fairest of all in Asgard, she who was wont to shake the spring flowers
from her golden locks as she passed over the frozen uplands, leaving
behind her a region of green and smiling beauty. Loki found the
goddess, and begged the loan of her magic falcon plumes, in which she
was wont to flit to and fro over the earth; and when she learnt for
what purpose he needed them she gladly assented.

Then Loki took the appearance of a great brown bird, and spreading his
wings he flew away towards Giantland.

It was a long journey, as he already knew, and, although the tempest
had now ceased to rage, he found the country of the giants darker and
colder and drearier than ever.

The longest journey comes to an end, and at length Loki reached a
mountain where sat the Giant Thrym, his huge legs dangling to the
ground, playing with a puppy as large as an elephant.

Perching as near as he dared, Loki gazed at the giant with his bright,
round eyes, and was wondering how to begin, when Thrym, who, at a
glance, had seen completely through his disguise, said calmly, in a
voice as much as possible like Thor's thunderous roar: "Oh, ho! Loki,
what are you doing so far from Asgard? Are you not afraid, little
fellow as you are, to venture alone into our country?"

Then Loki, thinking to win his way by flattery, replied: "Sad indeed
is it in Asgard, now that Mioelnir has vanished. Clever was that one
who spirited it away from the very side of Thor. Methinks none but you
could have done it, O mighty Thrym!"

Pleased with the compliment to his cleverness the giant chuckled
before admitting: "Ay, Loki, the hammer is mine, 'tis very true; and
now men will know who really is the Thunderer."

"Ah well!" sighed cunning Loki, "some men are strong by reason of
their weapons, and some are just as strong without. Small need have
you, O mighty Thrym, for hammers, but Thor is naught without it. Yet,
since all the world knows that you are his master, let him have his
plaything back, that we may cease to be troubled by his peevish
outcry."

But though Thrym was as stupid as he was big, he was not to be caught
thus.

"No, no, my little Loki," he said. "Mine is the hammer, and deep have
I buried it beneath the bottom of the sea. Go, tell this to your Asa
folk, and say to them that I will give it back on one condition
only--and that is, that they send me Freya, that fairest of maidens,
to be my wife."

At this suggestion Loki could scarcely keep from laughing, for the
idea of sending the beautiful Freya, the joy and delight of Asgard, to
be the wife of this ill-favoured Frost Giant was too absurd for
words.

It was not much to him, however, what happened to anyone except
himself, so he hastened to reply: "Be sure, O Thrym, that everything I
can do to further the matter shall be done. And if Freya is of the
same mind as I you will soon be welcoming that most sweet maiden to
Giantland--farewell!"

So saying, he spread his brown wings and flew back to Asgard,
delighted to think of the mischief he could now set brewing.

First of all he visited Thor, and told him of what had passed. And the
Thunderer, when he heard of Thrym's boastful words, was filled with
wild wrath and wanted to start off, then and there, and wrest the
hammer from the depths of the sea. But Loki pointed out the
difficulties that stood in the way and, leaving the Asa to ponder over
his words, he hurried off to Freya and informed her of Thrym's
proposal.

The beautiful Freya was walking in her garden, and round her neck she
wore her famous necklet of stars. When she heard Loki's suggestion
that she should wed a hideous giant she fell into such a rage that she
broke her necklace, and all the stars went falling through the sky, so
that men cried: "See how the stars are shooting!"

Meantime the Asa folk had met together to consider all that had
happened, and, having calmed the fury of Thor, they pointed out to him
that Asgard stood in the gravest danger of an attack which would find
them quite unprotected. When they had said this several times over,
Thor began to weary of the subject, and he replied with great
surliness: "Very well, then. Let Freya go to Thrym as his wife, and
then shall we be as before, with Mioelnir to defend us."

When Freya heard this, her rage turned to tears and lamentations, and
she declared that it would be death to her to send her to the gloomy
halls of Giantland, whence she could never hope to revisit the flowery
meads and grassy slopes of Asgard. And the Asas, unable to bear the
sight of her grief, with one voice declared that they would never
spare her from the Home of Bliss.

Then there stepped forward Heimdall, the watchman who sits on guard
over the Rainbow Bridge by night and day.

Now Heimdall had the gift of seeing into the future, and the Asas were
always ready to hear his words, well knowing them to be wise.

"My plan is this," said he. "Let Thor borrow the clothes of Freya and
put a thick veil over his face; and let him go thus to Thrym's castle
and pass for his bride. And if he cannot by some means manage to get
hold of the hammer when he is there--why, he must give it up
altogether."

At this suggestion the Asas clapped their hands with approval--all,
indeed, save Thor, who looked most glum, and was extremely unwilling
to agree to the plan.

"Dress me as a bride!" he grumbled. "A pretty maiden I shall make.
Ready enough am I to fight, but I will not make myself a
laughing-stock if I know it."

But the Asas besought him to give way, while Loki twitted him with
cowardice. Fair Freya, too, appealed with tearful eyes; and so at
length, with great reluctance, the Thunderer agreed to do what they
wished.

Fortunately the maiden Freya was very tall, but even so it was with
some difficulty that they managed to cover the burly form of Thor with
her robes.

He insisted, moreover, upon wearing his own shirt of mail and his
girdle of strength; and these took much drapery to hide. Great was the
laughter in the halls of Asgard that night as the Battle Maidens
brushed and curled Thor's long yellow hair, and set a jewelled
headdress upon it; and finally, when the maidens proceeded to cover up
his thick beard and angry eyes with a silken veil, the mirth of the
Asas was unrestrained. To complete the disguise, the maidens hung
round his neck the famous necklet, which had now been re-strung, and
finally Frigga, the wife of All-Father Odin, secured at his girdle the
great bunch of keys proper to brides at a wedding in the Northland.

While this was being done, Loki, more than all, had been convulsed
with merriment at the success of his mischief-making. The very sight
of Thor's disgusted looks, and of his great hands clenched with rage
under the delicate veil, nearly killed him with laughter; and when all
was ready he declared himself unable to lose an atom of the fun in
store.

"Let me go with you," he implored. "See, I will dress myself as your
handmaiden. Ah, you had better agree, for without me to prompt you,
you will never play your part."

So Loki was dressed as a waiting-maid, and took his seat very
demurely by the side of Thor in the goat-car. Loud was the laughter in
Asgard as the Asas watched the two drive off together and heard the
roar of the Thunderer's voice issuing from the folds of a meek
maiden's veil as he urged his goats upon their course. Long and stormy
was that ride to Giantland, for Thor was still in the worst of
tempers, and drove his chariot so furiously that

    "The mountains crashed,
    The earth stood in flames,"

as the hoofs of the goats clattered over mountains and waters,
striking sparks wherever they touched a rock.

Thrym was much overjoyed when he heard that a chariot containing the
two maidens was approaching his door. Away ran his servants in
different directions, some with orders to make ready a grand banquet,
some to prepare the chamber of the bride, some to receive her at the
door.

The giant himself assisted them to alight, and looked with admiration
at the stately figure of his bride; but he made no attempt to see her
face, since it is the custom in the Northland for the bride to remain
veiled until the marriage has been completed.

"A bride worthy of a giant!" murmured his servants, as he led her to a
lofty seat beside his own great throne of gold; and they looked with
approval also on the buxom form of the waiting-maid, who stood,
closely veiled, behind her mistress' chair.

Now the journey had been long and cold, and it was with joy that the
new-comers noticed that the preparations for the banquet were
complete, for they were exceedingly hungry.

The giants are huge eaters, and they gathered round the board, whereon
were displayed an enormous ox roasted whole, a vast dish of salmon and
various other dainties. But because the bride was a woman, and modest
withal, they brought her tiny morsels on a dainty golden plate.

This was too much for Thor, who had always possessed a most healthy
appetite, and was now more than usually ready for his supper.
Gradually drawing nearer to the table, whilst the others were busy
with the meal, he managed to get hold of the dish of roasted ox, and
within a few minutes the whole of the animal had disappeared.

Then he put out his hand to the platter of salmon, and in eight
mouthfuls disposed of eight of the great fish. After this he noticed a
large plate full of cakes and sweetmeats, which was set apart for the
ladies of the party. Of these, too, he made short work. Finally,
feeling thirsty after his huge meal, he took up two barrels of mead,
and tossed them off, one after another, down his capacious throat.
Then he sat back on his chair with a sigh of deep content.

These proceedings had been watched by Loki with uneasiness, but by
Thrym with open-mouthed dismay. Was this the usual appetite of this
dainty maiden, who had eaten more than the company of giants? But Loki
bent towards him and whispered in his ear that the thought of marrying
had so excited Freya that she had eaten nothing for eight days, and
had therefore been on the point of starvation.

This reassured the giant, and being now himself filled with mead he
drew nearer and, lifting a corner of the veil, tried to kiss the cheek
of his future bride.

But Thor, who was longing to be at close grips with him, threw him
such a fiery glance that he drew quickly back, saying: "Why does fair
Freya's eye burn like a spark from a furnace?" "Pooh!" whispered Loki
again, "that is nothing but her love for you, which for eight days has
raged like a flaming fire."

This news was still more pleasant to hear, and Thrym, in high good
humour, cried: "Bring in the hammer, my wedding gift, wherewith to
plight the maid. For when I have laid it on her lap she will be my own
for ever, and together we will work dire evil against the Asa folk,
whom I hate with all my heart."

What was that unmaidenly sound that issued from under the silken veil
at these words? But though Loki turned pale to hear it, Thrym, busy
sending for the hammer, did not pay any heed.

Back came the giant's servants at length, bending under the weight of
Mioelnir. And as they bowed before the silent maiden, sitting with
meekly bent head upon the throne, Thrym cried with a merry jest: "See,
here is little Thor's tiny plaything--a pretty toy truly for his
feeble hands. Take it, fair Freya, as my wedding gift."

"And take _that_ as mine!" roared Thor, in a voice of thunder, as he
flung off the veil and rose to his full height. And with the words he
swung the hammer once--and ere the eye could follow its movement, it
had crashed through Thrym's skull, and had knocked over a round dozen
of his guests. Yet again did it swing in the Asa's hand, and this time
it left not a giant standing in the hall.

A third time it was swung, and on this occasion the roof and walls of
the palace came tumbling on every side, and only Thor and Loki were
left alive amid the ruins.

"Ha! ha!" laughed Red Loki, "that was neatly done, fair Freya."

Thor, who was now busily tearing off the hated robes and veil, stayed
to look threateningly at his companion. "No more of that, Loki," said
he, "the thing had to be done, 'tis true, but talk not to me again of
this woman's work. We will remember only that I am the Thunderer, and
that my hammer that was lost is found."

So they drove back peacefully to Asgard.

And this is the end of the tale of How Thor's Hammer was lost and
found.




CHAPTER XI

The Giant's Daughters

_This is the tale the Northmen tell of how
the Giant's Daughters tried to kill Thor._


Ugliest and wickedest of all the giants was Geirrod, who lived in a
great gloomy castle away in a dark corner of Giantland, with his two
giant daughters, Gialp and Greip.

Hideous, indeed, were they, for, besides being of huge misshapen
figure and clumsy of feature, the one had red eyes and the other had
perfectly black teeth.

Now, when Geirrod heard of the death of Thrym, his brother, he waxed
very wroth, and swore with a great oath that he would never rest till
he had wreaked vengeance on Thor.

Loudly he described the terrible things he would do to him if only he
could catch him without his hammer, his belt of power, and his gloves
of might; and one ugly daughter blinked her red eyes, and the other
gnashed her black teeth, and both clamoured to have what might be left
of the Asa when their father had finished with him.

Meantime Thor was not even aware of the existence of these folk, and
it did not seem at all likely that he would put himself in their way.

About the time that Geirrod was thus breathing out threats against the
Thunderer, Loki grew restless within the walls of Asgard, and,
recalling the fun he had had when he visited Giantland in the guise of
a bird, he went to Freya once more with intent to borrow her falcon
dress. But Freya would not lend it again, for she had no liking for
Red Loki. So the mischievous fellow waited for a moment when she was
busy watering the blades of young corn, and stole the dress.

Only a few moments passed ere Loki was on the wing. To and fro he
flitted for awhile, and then directed his flight towards Giantland,
until at length, as luck would have it, he found himself hovering
above the towers of Geirrod's castle.

The giant and his family were sitting at their great table as Loki
arrived upon the scene. Peering through the open window he could see
the ugly trio snatching at the joints from the smoking dishes, and
half choking themselves in their efforts each to eat faster than the
rest.

Perching on the window-sill, Loki could not resist a croaking chuckle
of amusement, and at the same time his great wings shut out much of
the light, so that the giant's attention was attracted, and he looked
quickly up.

"Ho! Catch me yon bird!" he cried to one of his servants, for there
was that about the appearance of the falcon that revealed the truth to
Geirrod at a glance.

The servant leapt at once to the window-sill; but the ledge was too
high for him, and Loki croaked and chuckled at his vain attempts,
keeping all but within reach in order to increase the fun.

But suddenly the servant, giving an extra high spring, managed to get
a grip of the sill, and as Loki spread his wings in flight he found
his feet firmly caught in some ivy. In vain he struggled to get free,
the servant seized him fast and carried him off in triumph to Geirrod.

"Who are you?" asked the giant; but Loki only blinked and made no
reply.

"What are you doing here?" he demanded again; but still he got only a
blink for answer.

"Who sent you to spy upon us?" roared Geirrod; Loki gave only another
blink.

Then the giant arose in wrath, and, declaring that hunger and thirst
were the best things in the world to teach a bird to talk, he locked
the unfortunate Asa in a strong cage, with neither food nor drink.

For three whole months he languished, and then at last, being at the
point of death, he croaked out feebly that he was Asa Loki, and
promised anything in his power if Geirrod would only set him free.

This was the chance which the giant had been waiting for.

"Bring me here," said he, "yon Thor of whom I hear so much, and see
that he comes without his hammer or his belt of strength or his gloves
of might."

And this Loki promised to do.

As soon as he was able, Loki flew back to Asgard, with a fine story
composed upon the way. He told Thor that during his three months'
absence he had been a welcome guest at the hall of a friendly giant,
Geirrod by name; and that, when he had reluctantly torn himself away,
the giant had expressed the strongest wish that he would revisit him,
along with Thor the Thunderer, of whose brave deeds he had often heard
tell.

Flattered by these honeyed words, Thor readily fell into the trap and
agreed to accompany Loki to Geirrod's hall. He even laid aside his
hammer, girdle, and gloves, when Loki pointed out that to wear such
things would not be courteous to their friendly host.

Then the two set forth together.

Now on their way they passed the house of Grid, a kindly old giantess,
who had long been a friend of Thor's. Sitting in her doorway, she saw
them pass by, and beckoned to Thor to come to her, while Loki,
unsuspecting, went on his way.

"Whence goest thou, Asa Thor?" asked the old giantess.

"To Geirrod's hall, good mother," he cheerfully replied. "Do you know
him?"

"Know him!" said Grid, with a hoarse chuckle. "Is there anyone who
does not know Geirrod? But why, my son Thor, do you go unarmed to the
hall of the strongest and wickedest of all the giants?"

Then Thor ground his teeth, exclaiming: "This is another trick of that
rascal Loki! And now, what is to be done, for if I return to fetch
Mioelnir, and my girdle of strength and my gloves of might, they will
say that Thor is afraid."

Now Grid was possessed of a girdle of strength, a staff of power, and
gloves of might, and these she produced and gave to Thor, bidding him
say not a word about them.

And when Thor had thanked her he resumed his way after Loki.

Presently the two Asas came to the brink of a river which is the
largest in all the world, and the waves were dashing far above their
heads. Then Thor buckled on the belt of strength and, taking the staff
firmly in his grasp, he stepped boldly into the water, while Loki
clung to his belt, for he was afraid. Higher and higher rose the
waves, and if Thor had not kept a firm grip on the staff of power he
must have been washed away. But Loki, overcome with fear, let go of
the belt and was carried by the waves back whence he came; and from
thence he hastened back to Asgard as fast as he could run.

When Thor had reached midstream he saw Gialp, the red-eyed daughter of
the giant, stirring up the water at its source with intent to
overwhelm him. So, stooping quickly, he took up out of the river an
enormous rock and threw it at her. He was not wont to miss his mark,
and the giantess fled, howling. At once the waters abated, and Thor,
seeing a mountain ash over-hanging the river caught at it and pulled
himself safely ashore.

This is why the mountain ash from that time has been called "Thor's
Salvation."

Wearied with his journey, Thor gladly turned his steps towards
Geirrod's hall, which loomed out of the darkness near by. He was
received with much honour by the giant's servants, though Geirrod
himself had not yet returned home.

A banquet had been prepared within the hall, and thither Thor was
conducted. But, somewhat to his surprise, he could see only one chair.
This, however, was large and roomy, draped round the legs and
comfortably cushioned, so the Asa was glad to throw his tired limbs
upon it.

But scarcely had he done so, when the chair began to rise beneath him,
and it ascended towards the rafters with such force and speed that in
another moment Thor would have been crushed to death, had he not
retained his hold of the staff of power. This he now pushed against
the rafters, and at the same time he pressed down on the seat with
such force that he descended again with a loud crash, which was
mingled with shrieks and screams. For Gialp and Greip, the giant's
daughters, had hidden themselves under the chair, intending to kill
Thor, and had now met the fate which they had prepared for him.

After this, Thor proceeded to eat a good supper, and scarcely had he
finished when the Giant Geirrod came striding into the hall.

He gnashed his teeth horribly when he saw Thor sitting quite at home,
but he pretended that he was pleased at his visit, and at once invited
him into another hall, where a number of large fires were burning.

Here he proceeded to challenge Thor to a contest of skill in throwing.
The Thunderer, nothing loth, bade Geirrod give the signal.

But Geirrod, thinking to catch Thor off his guard, snatched up a
red-hot wedge of iron from the fire and flung it at him.

Quick as lightning, Thor caught the wedge in his glove of might, and
so forcibly did he throw it back that it passed through the giant,
through the pillar in front of which he stood, through the wall of his
castle, and at last buried itself fathoms deep in the rock without.

Nor was this all, for at the touch of the red-hot iron the body of
Geirrod was turned into stone; this Thor now took and set up on top of
a high mountain in Giantland; and it was long before any of the folk
of that country dared try conclusions with the Thunderer again.

And this is the end of the tale of How the Giant's Daughters tried to
kill Thor.




CHAPTER XII

The Story of Balder the Beautiful

_This is the tale the Northmen tell of the
sad fate of Balder the Beautiful._


Fair beyond all the sons of Odin was Balder the Beautiful, Balder of
the snow-white brow and golden locks, and he was well beloved not only
by the Asa folk, but also by the men of the earth below.

    "Of all the twelve round Odin's throne,
    Balder, the Beautiful, alone,
    The Sun-god, good and pure and bright,
    Was loved by all, as all love light."

Balder had a twin-brother named Hoder, who was born blind. Gloomy and
silent was he, but none the less he loved his bright sun-brother best
of all in heaven or earth.

The home of Balder was a palace with silver roof and pillars of gold,
and nothing unclean or impure was allowed to come inside its doors.

Very wise in all magic charms was this radiant young god; and for all
others save himself he could read the future; but "to keep his own
life safe and see the sun" was not granted to him.

Now there came a time when Balder's bright face grew sad and downcast;
and when his father Odin and his mother Frigga perceived this they
implored him to tell them the cause of his grief. Then Balder told
them that he had been troubled by strange dreams; and, since in those
days men believed that dreams were sent as a warning of what was about
to happen, he had gone heavily since these visions had come to him.

First he had dreamt that a dark cloud had arisen which came before the
sun and shut out all brightness from the land.

The next night he dreamt again that Asgard lay in darkness, and that
her bright flowers and radiant trees were withered and lifeless, and
that the Asa folk, dull and withered also, were sorrowing as though
from some great calamity.

The third night he dreamt yet again that Asgard was dark and lifeless
and that from out of the gloom one sad voice cried:

"Woe! Woe! Woe! For Balder the Beautiful is dead--is dead!"

Odin listened to the recital of this story with heavy heart, and at
its conclusion he mounted his coal-black horse and rode over many a
hard and toilsome road till he came to the dark abode of Hela. And
there he saw, to his surprise, that a great banquet was being prepared
in the gloomy hall. Dishes of gold were set upon the table and all the
couches were covered with the richest silken tapestry, as though some
honoured guest were expected. But a throne that stood at the head of
the table was empty.

Very thoughtfully Odin rode on through those dim halls till he came to
one where dwelt an ancient prophetess, whose voice no man had heard
for many a long year.

Silent he stood before her, until she asked in a voice that sounded as
though it came from far away: "Who art thou, and from whence dost thou
come to trouble my long rest?"

Now Odin was fearful that she would not answer him did he give his
real name, so he told her that he was the son of Valtam, and asked
anxiously for whom the grim goddess of death was preparing her
banquet.

Then, to his great grief, the hollow voice of the prophetess replied
that Balder was the expected guest, and that he would shortly be sent
thither, slain by the hand of Hoder, the blind god of darkness.

"Who then," asked Odin, in sorrowful tones, "shall avenge the death of
Balder?"

And she answered that the son of the Earth-goddess, Vali by name,
should neither

            "Comb his raven hair
    Nor wash his visage in the stream,
    Nor see the sun's departing beam,
    Till he on Hoder's corse shall smile
    Flaming on the funeral pile."

And learning thus of the fate of his two favourite sons, All-Father
Odin went sadly back to Asgard.

Meantime Mother Frigga had not been idle. Filled with anxiety for her
darling son, she decided to send her servants throughout the earth,
bidding them exact a promise from all things--not only living
creatures, but plants, stones, and metals, fire, water, trees and
diseases of all kinds--that they would do harm in no way to Balder the
Beautiful.

Theirs was an easy task, for all things loved the bright Sun-god, and
readily agreed to give the pledge. Nothing was overlooked save only
the mistletoe, growing upon the oak-tree that shaded the entrance to
Valhalla. It seemed so insignificant that no one thought it worth
while to ask this plant to take the oath.

The servants returned to Frigga with all the vows and compacts that
had been made; and the Mother of Gods and Men went back with heart at
ease to her spinning-wheel.

The Asa folk, too, were reassured, and, casting aside the burden of
care that had fallen upon them, they resumed their favourite game upon
the plains of Idavold, where they were wont to contend with one
another in the throwing of golden disks.

And when it became known among them that nothing would hurt Balder the
Beautiful they invented a new game.

Placing the young Sun-god in their midst, they would throw stones at
him, or thrust at him with their knives, or strike with their wooden
staves; and the wood or the knife or the stone would glance off from
Balder and leave him quite unhurt.

This new game delighted both Balder and the Asa folk, and so loud was
their laughter that Loki, who was some distance away pursuing one of
his schemes in the disguise of an old woman, shook with rage at the
sound. For Loki was jealous of Balder and, as is usual with people who
make themselves disliked, nothing gave him such displeasure as to see
a group of the Asas on such happy terms with each other.

Presently, in his wanderings, Loki passed by the house of Fensalir, in
the doorway of which sat Frigga, at her spinning-wheel. She did not
recognise Red Loki, but greeted him kindly and asked:

"Old woman, dost thou know why the gods are so merry this evening?"

And Loki answered: "They are casting stones and throwing sharp knives
and great clubs at Balder the Beautiful, who stands smiling in their
midst, daring them to hurt him."

Then Frigga smiled tranquilly and turned again to her wheel, saying:
"Let them play on, for no harm will come to him whom all things in
heaven and earth have sworn not to hurt."

"Art thou sure, good mother, that _all_ things in heaven and earth
have taken this vow?"

"Ay, indeed," replied Frigga, "all save a harmless little plant, the
mistletoe, which grows on the oak by Valhalla, and this is far too
small and weak to be feared."

And to this Loki replied in musing voice, nodding his head as he
spoke: "Yea, thou art right, great Mother of Gods and Men."

But the wicked Asa had learnt what he desired to know. The instrument
by which he might bring harm to Balder the Beautiful was now awaiting
him, and he determined to use it, to the dire sorrow of Asgard.

Hastening to the western gate of Valhalla, he pulled a clump of the
mistletoe from the oak, and fashioned therefrom a little wand, or
stick, and with this in his hand he returned to the plain of Idavold.
He was far too cunning, however, to attempt to carry out his wicked
design himself. His malicious heart was too well known to the Asa
folk. But he soon found an innocent tool. Leaning against a tree, and
taking no part in the game, was Hoder, the blind god, the twin-brother
of Balder, and to him he began:

"Hark to the Asas--how they laugh! Do you take no share in the game,
good Hoder?"

"Not I," said Hoder gloomily, "for I am blind, and know not where to
throw."

"I could show you that," said Loki, assuming a pleasant tone; "'tis no
hard matter, Hoder, and methinks the Asas will call you proud and
haughty if you take no share in the fun."

"But I have nothing to throw," said poor blind Hoder.

Then Loki said: "Here, at least, is a small shaft, 'twill serve your
purpose," and leading innocent Hoder into the ring he cunningly guided
his aim. Hoder, well pleased to be able to share in a game with his
beloved brother, boldly sped the shaft, expecting to hear the usual
shouts of joyous laughter which greeted all such attempts. There fell
instead dead silence on his ear, and immediately on this followed a
wail of bitter agony. For Balder the Beautiful had fallen dead without
a groan, his heart transfixed by the little dart of mistletoe.

    "So on the floor lay Balder dead; and round
    Lay thickly strewn swords, axes, darts, and spears,
    Which all the gods in sport had idly thrown
    At Balder, whom no weapon pierced or clove;
    But in his breast stood fixed the fatal bough
    Of mistletoe, which Loki the Accuser gave
    To Hoder, and unwitting Hoder threw--
    'Gainst that alone had Balder's life no charm."

Dreading he knew not what, Hoder stood in doubt for some moments. But
soon the meaning of that bitter wail was borne in upon him, piercing
the cloud of darkness in which he always moved. He opened wide his
arms as though to clasp the beloved form, and then with: "I have slain
thee, my brother," despair seized him and he fell prostrate in utter
grief.

Meantime, the Asa folk crowded round the silent form of Balder,
weeping and wailing; but, alas! their moans and tears could not bring
Balder back. At length, All-Father Odin, whose grief was too deep for
lamentations, bade them be silent and prepare to bear the body of the
dead Asa to the seashore.

The unhappy Hoder, unable to take part in these last offices, made his
way sadly through Asgard, beyond the walls and along the seashore,
until he came to the house Fensalir.

Frigga was seated upon her seat of honour before the fire against the
inner wall, and standing before her, with bent head and woeful
sightless gaze, Hoder told her of the dread mishap that had befallen.

"Tell me, O mother," he cried in ending, and his voice sounded like
the wail of the wind on stormy nights, "tell me, is there aught I can
do to bring my brother back? Or can I make agreement with the dread
mother of the Underworld, giving my life in exchange for his?"

Woe crowded upon woe in the heart of Frigga as she listened to the
story. The doom was wrought that she had tried so vainly to avert,
and not even her mother's love had availed to safeguard the son so
dearly cherished.

"On Balder Death hath laid her hand, not thee, my son," she said, "yet
though we fail in the end, there is much that may be tried before all
hope is lost."

Then she told Hoder of a road by which the abode of Hela could be
reached, one which had been travelled by none living save Odin
himself.

    "Who goes that way must take no other horse
    To ride, but Sleipnir, Odin's horse, alone.
    Nor must he choose that common path of gods
    Which every day they come and go in heaven,
    O'er the bridge Bifrost, where is Heimdall's watch.

    But he must tread a dark untravelled road
    Which branches from the north of heaven, and ride
    Nine days, nine nights, toward the northern ice,
    Through valleys deep engulfed, with roaring streams.
    And he will reach on the tenth morn a bridge
    Which spans with golden arches Gioell's stream.
    Then he will journey through no lighted land,
    Nor see the sun arise, nor see it set;

    And he must fare across the dismal ice
    Northward, until he meets a stretching wall
    Barring his way, and in the wall a grate,
    But then he must dismount and on the ice
    Tighten the girths of Sleipnir, Odin's horse,
    And make him leap the grate, and come within."

There in that cheerless abode dead Balder was enthroned, but, said
Frigga, he who braves that dread journey must take no heed of him, nor
of the sad ghosts flitting to and fro, like eddying leaves. First he
must accost their gloomy queen and entreat her with prayers:

    "Telling her all that grief they have in heaven
    For Balder, whom she holds by right below."

A bitter groan of anguish escaped from Hoder when Frigga had finished
her recital of the trials which must be undergone:

    "Mother, a dreadful way is this thou showest;
    No journey for a sightless god to go."

And she replied:

    "... Thyself thou shalt not go, my son;
    But he whom first thou meetest when thou com'st
    To Asgard and declar'st this hidden way,
    Shall go; and I will be his guide unseen."

Meantime the Asa folk had felled trees and had carried to the seashore
outside the walls of Asgard a great pile of fuel, which they laid upon
the deck of Balder's great ship, _Ringhorn_, as it lay stranded high
up on the beach.

    "Seventy ells and four extended
      On the grass the vessel's keel;
    High above it, gilt and splendid,
    Rose the figurehead ferocious
      With its crest of steel."

Then they adorned the funeral pyre with garlands of flowers, with
golden vessels and rings, with finely wrought weapons and rich
necklets and armlets; and when this was done they carried out the fair
body of Balder the Beautiful, and bearing it reverently upon their
shields they laid it upon the pyre.

Then they tried to launch the good ship, but so heavily laden was she
that they could not stir her an inch.

The Mountain-Giants, from their heights afar, had watched the tragedy
with eyes that were not unpitying, for even they had no ill-will for
Balder, and they sent and told of a giantess called Hyrroken, who was
so strong that she could launch any vessel whatever its weight might
be.

So the Asas sent to fetch her from Giantland, and she soon came,
riding a wolf for steed and twisted serpents for reins.

When she alighted, Odin ordered four of his mightiest warriors to
hold the wolf, but he was so strong that they could do nothing until
the giantess had thrown him down and bound him fast.

Then with a few enormous strides, Hyrroken reached the great vessel,
and set her shoulder against the prow, sending the ship rolling into
the deep. The earth shook with the force of the movement as though
with an earthquake, and the Asa folk collided with one another like
pine-trees during a storm. The ship, too, with its precious weight,
was well-nigh lost. At this Thor was wroth and, seizing his hammer,
would have slain the giantess had not the other Asas held him back,
bidding him not forget the last duty to the dead god. So Thor hallowed
the pyre with a touch of his sacred hammer and kindled it with a thorn
twig, which is the emblem of sleep.

Last of all, before the pyre blazed up, All-Father Odin added to the
pile of offerings his magic ring, from which fell eight new rings
every ninth night, and bending he whispered in Balder's ear.

But none to this day know the words that Odin spake thus in the ear of
his dead son.

Then the flames from the pyre rose high and the great ship drifted out
to sea, and the wind caught the sails and fanned the flames till it
seemed as though sky and sea were wrapped in golden flame.

    "And while they gazed, the sun went lurid down
    Into the smoke-wrapt sea, and night came on.
    But through the dark they watched the burning ship
    Still carried o'er the distant waters....
    But fainter, as the stars rose high, it flared;
    And as, in a decaying winter fire,
    A charr'd log, falling, makes a shower of sparks--
    So, with a shower of sparks, the pile fell in,
    Reddening the sea around; and all was dark."

And thus did Balder the Beautiful pass from the peaceful steads of
Asgard, as passes the sun when he paints the evening clouds with the
glory of his setting.

     _Note._--Most of the poetical extracts throughout this
     chapter are taken from Matthew Arnold's "Balder Dead."


THE PASSING OF BALDER

    I heard a voice, that cried,
    "Balder the Beautiful
    Is dead, is dead!"
    And through the misty air
    Passed like the mournful cry
    Of sunward sailing cranes.

    I saw the pallid corpse
    Of the dead sun
    Borne through the Northern sky.
    Blasts from Niffelheim
    Lifted the sheeted mists
    Around him as he passed.

    And the voice for ever cried,
    "Balder the Beautiful
    Is dead, is dead!"
    And died away
    Through the dreary night,
    In accents of despair.

    Balder the Beautiful,
    God of the summer sun,
    Fairest of all the Gods!
    Light from his forehead beamed,
    Runes were upon his tongue,
    As on the warrior's sword.

    All things in earth and air
    Bound were by magic spell
    Never to do him harm;
    Even the plants and stones;
    All save the mistletoe,
    The sacred mistletoe!

    Hoder, the blind old God,
    Whose feet are shod with silence,
    Pierced through that gentle breast
    With his sharp spear, by fraud
    Made of the mistletoe,
    The accursed mistletoe!

    They laid him in his ship,
    With horse and harness,
    As on a funeral pyre.
    Odin placed
    A ring upon his finger,
    And whispered in his ear.

    They launched the burning ship!
    It floated far away
    Over the misty sea,
    Till like the sun it seemed,
    Sinking beneath the waves.
    Balder returned no more!

                       LONGFELLOW.




CHAPTER XIII

How Hermod Made a Journey to the Underworld

_This is the tale which the Northmen tell of how
Hermod journeyed to the Underworld to bring
back Balder the Beautiful to Asgard._


Of all the Asa folk most fleet of foot was Hermod, but on that sad eve
when Balder was laid upon the funeral pyre his step was lagging and
slow as he went to his home by the city wall.

As he approached, there met him in the gloom a vague figure, that
walked with outstretched hands and faltering steps like one that is
blind. And Hermod knew it to be the form of Hoder of the sightless
eyes, brother to Balder and to him.

But when he would have spoken Hoder brushed past, murmuring in his
ear:

    "Take Sleipnir, Hermod, and set forth with dawn
    To Hela's kingdom, to ask Balder back;
    and they shall be thy guides who have the power."

Hermod bowed his head and passed on; but poor blind Hoder,
heartbroken, went his way to his own house and shut the door upon his
grief.

When the first rosy fingers of dawn touched the clouds of morning
Hermod led out Sleipnir, the steed of Odin, from Valhalla, and rode
away. Sleipnir was not wont to permit any to mount him, or even to
touch his mane, save the All-Father himself; but he stood meekly as
Hermod mounted; for he knew upon what errand they were bound.

Nine long days and nine long nights rode Hermod towards the realms of
ice and snow; and on the tenth morn he drew near to the golden bridge
which spanned Gioell, the greatest river in the world.

A maiden of pale and downcast mien kept this bridge, with unsleeping
vigilance, and she now challenged Hermod as he approached:

    "Who art thou on thy black and fiery horse,
    Under whose hoofs the bridge o'er Gioell's stream
    Rumbles and shakes? Tell me thy race and home.
    But yestermorn, five troops of dead passed by,
    Bound on their way below to Hela's realm,
    Nor shook the bridge so much as thou alone.
    And thou hast flesh and colour on thy cheeks,
    Like men who live, and draw the vital air;
    Nor look'st thou pale and wan, like men deceased,
    Souls bound below, my daily passers here."

Then Hermod told his name and whence he came, and asked eagerly if
Balder had already crossed that bridge. And the maiden told him that
Balder had indeed passed that way along the road to Hela's kingdom.

So Hermod galloped over the golden bridge, and resumed his way through
a darksome tract of frozen country, and over fields of ice unlighted
save by dim stars that shone uncertainly through the mist. At length
further passage was barred by a high wall in which was a grate.
Without hesitation Hermod put Sleipnir to this obstacle, he surmounted
it with the ease and grace of a fawn, and they found themselves in
Hela's realm.

On passed Hermod, unheeding the murmuring shades that flocked around,
and he did not draw rein until, coming to Hela's hall, he saw there
Balder, his brother, and, near by, the awful goddess.

Leaping from Sleipnir, the young Asa knelt before Hela and besought
her that Balder might ride home with him, that the heavy hearts of all
in Asgard might be comforted.

But dark Hela shook her head, reminding him how Odin had cast her out
with her two brothers, the Serpent and the Fenris Wolf; why should she
grant the Asa folk this boon?

Then Hermod laid his hands upon her knees. "All things in heaven and
earth grieve for Balder, therefore restore him, good mother, and
darken not our lives for evermore," he answered.

The appeal in his mournful eyes, as well as in his words, somewhat
moved Hela, though her heart was still hardened against Odin, and she
said: "Come now, let us see if all things love Balder as you say,

    "Show me through all the world the signs of grief!
    Fails but one thing to grieve, here Balder stops!
    Let all that lives and moves upon the earth
    Weep him, and all that is without life weep:
    Let gods, men, brutes, beweep him; plants and stones.
    So shall I know the lost was dear indeed,
    And bend my heart, and give him back to heaven."

Then Hermod was given permission to greet his brother, and Balder
answered him with faint voice. They spoke of Asgard, the beloved land
of living gods and heroes, and at parting Balder charged his brother
to carry the magic ring, Draupnir, back to Odin, and a kerchief and
other gifts to Frigga, as tokens of his love. And Hermod rode sadly
back along the weary road to Asgard.

All-Father Odin from his high seat saw his son returning, and he
hastened forth to receive him.

    "And Hermod came, and leapt from Sleipnir down,
    And in his father's hand put Sleipnir's rein
    And greeted Odin and the gods."

Then all the Asa folk assembled in the Council Hall, at the root of
the Tree of Life, to hear the message that Hermod had brought from the
joyless realms; and he told them of Hela's reply to his request,
saying:

    "... To your prayer she sends you this reply:
    _Show her through all the world the signs of grief!
    Fails but one thing to grieve, there Balder stops!
    Let gods, men, brutes, beweep him; plants and stones;
    So shall she know your loss was dear indeed,
    And bend her heart, and give you Balder back._"

When Hermod had ceased speaking, All-Father Odin arose, and leaning on
his great staff he looked slowly around and commanded: "Go ye quickly
forth through all the world and pray all living and unliving things to
weep for Balder dead."

Then the gods arose willingly and went their way through all the
world, Thor in his goat chariot, and Freya in her carriage drawn by
white cats, but most of the others on swift horses. North, South,
East, and West, they rode, entreating all things to weep for Balder's
death.

    "And all that lived, and all without life, wept."

Just as at the end of winter, before the springtime, when a warm
south-west wind blows over the land and melts the ice and snow,

                      "A dripping sound is heard
    In all the forests....
    And, in fields sloping to the south, dark plots
    Of grass peep out amid surrounding snow,
    And widen, and the peasant's heart is glad"--

so through the whole world was now heard the sound of falling tears,
as all things living and dead wept for Balder's sake.

Hermod rode with the Storm-god, Nioerd, who knew all the creeks and
hidden bays of the coastline of the earth; and when the sea-creatures
and those that live on the borders of the ocean heard the message they
all added their tribute of tears to the common cause.

Now, as the Asas rode home together they came to a great wood upon the
borders of Giantland, where all the trees are of iron. And in the
midst of this wood was a cave, at the mouth of which sat an ancient
giantess, gnashing her teeth at all who passed by.

This seeming giantess was none other but wicked Loki in disguise, but
this Hermod did not know.

As the Asas came near, she greeted them with shrill laughter, and
asked them if it was dull in Asgard that they came thither to her iron
wood. But they answered that they came not for gibes but for tears,
that Balder might be saved. Then she laughed louder and cried:

    "Is Balder dead? And do ye come for tears?
    Weep him all other things, if weep they will:
    I weep him not! let Hela keep her prey."

And with these mocking words she fled to the dark recesses of her
cave, repeating again and again:

    "Neither in life, nor yet in death,
    Gave he me gladness.
    Let Hela keep her prey."

Heavy were the steps with which Hermod returned to Asgard, and when
they had heard the news of how one creature had refused her tears, the
eager faces of the Asa folk grew dark with woe, for they knew that
never more would they see Balder--Balder the Beautiful.

But the future days brought peace to the tormented soul of Hoder, the
innocent cause of all their grief.

For there was born to Odin a child who grew to his full size within a
few short hours. And on the first day that he arrived in Asgard he
fared forth with bow and arrow, and one of his shafts found mark in
the heart of Hoder.

And so, from henceforth, the blind god and his twin-brother are
together in the realms of Hela.




CHAPTER XIV

How Loki was Punished at Last

_This is the tale the Northmen tell of how Red Loki
was punished at last for his sins._


When the Asas knew that it was Loki, disguised as Thok, the
giant-woman, who had refused to shed the tears that would have won
Balder's release, they determined to bear with his presence in Asgard
no longer.

So with many a hard word and ugly look they drove him forth, bidding
him never enter those gates again.

But the Asa folk were still sad and heavy of heart: for at every
moment the gloom that lay over the city reminded them of the loss of
their bright young Balder.

AEgir, god of the sea, saw their forlorn condition, and he prepared a
great banquet in the caves of coral that lie underneath the sea, and
bade all the Asas attend it as his guests.

    "That though for Balder every guest
    Was grieving yet,
    He might forget
    Awhile his woe in friendly feast."

The invitation was pleasing to the gods, and on the day appointed they
came, attired in their richest cloaks of silk and satin, green and
blue and yellow and purple, by a path through the waters whereby they
reached the coral caves of the Sea-god.

Very beautiful were these caves. The walls and ceilings were carved
with the most delicate fret-work of pink and cream and white, and a
faint green light shone into them from the ocean without.

The floor was covered with the finest silver sand, encrusted with
beautiful sea-shells, and the flowers with which the tables were
adorned were feathery sea-weeds and glowing sea-anemones. In the midst
of the floor was a mass of gold, so bright that it lighted up the
whole place as though with fire.

The dishes upon the table were filled with the most delicious fish, of
every kind and variety, and the gods sat down to the feast well
pleased, regretting only the absence of the well-loved Balder, and the
fact that Thor had been detained by a tempest, which kept him busy in
the regions of the dwarfs, from whence he hoped to travel to the
sea-caves directly his work was done.

Merrily went the banquet, for all the Asas were filled with goodwill
towards one another and towards their burly host, who sat at the head
of the board with his long grey beard sweeping his broad chest.

Suddenly into the midst of this cheerful scene fell a black shadow
from the entrance to the cave; and there, red and gaunt, and evil of
countenance, stood Loki, glowering upon them all.

At first the Asas sat in silence, their anger too deep for words. Then
Odin arose and sternly bade the intruder begone.

This was the signal for a storm of hatred in words so evil that they
poisoned the air. For a time the Asas pretended not to heed, but went
on quietly with the meal. One of them even tried to drown his speech
by talking loudly to old AEgir in praise of the servant who waited so
deftly upon them all. But at the word Loki sprang forward, knife in
hand, and killed the unfortunate serving-man before their eyes.

Then the Asa folk arose and cast out Loki with violence, threatening
him with dire punishment should he appear in their presence again.

Resuming their seats at the interrupted feast, they made brave efforts
to appear gay and cheerful; but scarcely had they begun to eat when
Loki came creeping in again disguised as a sea-serpent. Once in, he
resumed his proper form and began as before to revile the gods,
taunting them one after another with the mistakes which each had made,
and telling his malicious stories, so that the gods were filled with
dismay, and with suspicion, each of his neighbour.

Louder and louder grew the voice of Loki, the Asas all the time
sitting as if turned to stone, and now he began to heap abuse on the
head of Sif, the fair-haired wife of Thor.

Suddenly there was heard outside the noise of goats' feet clattering
over the rocks, and in another moment the Thunderer entered,
brandishing his hammer about his head and crying:

"Silence, thou wicked wretch, or my mighty hammer shall put a stop to
thy prating. At one blow will I strike thy head from thy neck, and
then will thy evil tongue be silenced once for all!"

But Loki did not wait for Thor to strike. Quick as light he dashed out
of the cave and disappeared. He well knew that now at length he had
indeed lost all hope of forgiveness.

Wandering in dismal wise about the earth, fear seized him after a time
lest Odin or the Thunderer should find and slay him, in order to
prevent further annoyance.

So he made his way to the mountains of the North, and there he built
for himself a hut with four doors, open to every quarter of the earth,
that, if need arose, he might be able to escape quickly.

He built this hut, moreover, close to a mountain side, down which
rushed a mighty cataract of water. For he intended, if the Asas found
him, to spring into the stream, change himself into a salmon, and so
make good his escape.

But when, sitting within his cold and draughty hut, he began to
consider the matter afresh, he remembered that, even if he carried out
this plan, he would not yet be quite safe.

For though he could easily avoid any hook that ever was made, he would
find it very difficult to evade capture if the gods should think of
making a net like that which the Sea-goddess, Ran, spreads for unwary
men when they are fishing or bathing in the sea, and all the time she
is lurking near in some cavern on the shore, or enmeshed in the dark
folds of a giant sea-weed in the ocean depths.

So much and so long did Loki brood over the thought of Ran's
fishing-net, that at length he began to wonder if such a thing could
really be made, and then to try to weave one out of twine as much like
it as possible.

He had not quite finished his curious task when upon the mountain,
just above the hut, he suddenly perceived the two mighty figures of
his dreaded foes.

Knowing that their intention must be to enter his hut and make him
prisoner, Loki hastily threw the half-made net upon the fire, and
rushing forth he flung himself into the waterfall, where he quickly
changed himself into a salmon and lurked unseen among the stones in
the torrent's bed.

Meantime, the two Asas had entered the hut.

"Ho! ho!" said Odin, as he noted the silence of the place, "our bird
has flown."

"What fresh mischief doth he plan?" muttered Thor, looking closely
about him.

"Let us look further afield," urged Odin; but Thor kicked over the
logs on the hearth and picked out the half-burned net.

Now Odin well knew the net of Ran, and the half-burnt strands
suggested to him the truth. So he set to work and, with Thor's
assistance, quickly mended the net, and they proceeded to drag the
mountain stream with it.

At their first attempt sly Loki hid between two stones at the bottom
of the river, laughing in scorn as the net passed over his head.

Then the Asas weighted the net with stones and tried again; but Loki
gave a great leap over the net, and dashed up stream.

A third time they made the attempt, and now Loki, grown reckless,
leaped out of the water. But this time Thor caught him by his tail,
and held it fast in spite of its slipperiness.

Then the gods forced him to resume his usual shape, and they carried
him off to an underground cavern, far below the earth, and there they
bound him fast to a rock with iron fetters.

Most things in heaven and earth rejoiced at the downfall of wicked Red
Loki, but above all rejoiced Skadi the giantess. Her home was in the
cold mountain stream which Loki had invaded, and he had done her many
an ill turn in bygone days.

This Skadi now took a poisonous serpent and fastened it above his
head, so that the venom of the reptile falling, drop by drop, upon his
face, would cause the most terrible pain. But Sigyn, Loki's loyal
wife, the only person in heaven or earth who cared what became of him,
took a cup and held it up to catch the burning drops as they fell, and
she only left his side when the cup was full and she had to empty it.

In these brief periods, the fettered god howled with rage and pain, in
tones which echoed through the dismal caverns of earth like mighty
peals of thunder, and his writhing shook the earth to its foundations,
bringing the Northmen from their dwellings in terror of what they
thought to be violent earthquakes.

But his efforts can avail nothing until the day of Ragnarok. Then
shall his bonds be loosed, and he shall fight his last battle and
fall, never to rise again.




CHAPTER XV

The Story of the Magic Sword

_This is the tale the Northmen tell of how a great feud
arose between the Volsungs and the Goths._


Sigi, the son of Odin, was a man mighty in the hunt, and he lived in
the house of Skadi. And one day he went out to the woods with Bredi,
Skadi's servant, and they hunted deer all day long. But when they
gathered their spoil in the evening, it was found that Bredi had slain
far more than Sigi, and it vexed the soul of Sigi that a servant
should hunt better than his master. So, in his jealous rage, he fell
upon Bredi and killed him, and hid his body in a snowdrift, after
which he rode home in the gloaming, with the tale that Bredi had
ridden away from him into the wild woods.

"Out of the sight of mine eyes he rode," said he, "and I know not what
has become of him."

But Skadi did not believe his words--for Sigi's eyes looked sideways
as he spoke--and he sent and searched the woods, and the body of Bredi
was found in a snowdrift. Then, his dark suspicion being confirmed, he
took Sigi and put him forth from the land and commanded that he be an
outlaw for ever.

Sigi embarked upon the ocean in a small boat, and he had not been
sailing long when a little skiff drew near, wherein was an old man
with one eye, wearing a broad-brimmed grey hat. This was none other
than Odin, who had come to succour his son, and he took the boat in
tow and brought Sigi to a war vessel manned with a brave crew, well
armed and provided, which he gave into his charge, promising that
victory in battle should always be his.

Then Sigi took fresh heart and, ever aided by the powerful favour of
Odin, he won at length dominion and lordship over the great empire of
the Huns.

Yet did he not escape punishment for the evil deed of his youth, for
when he was very old the favour of Odin forsook him; and the brother
of his wife, whom he trusted above all men, fell upon him with
treachery and slew him.

But the son of Sigi was now a brave youth, and gathering the warriors
of his land he drove out his mother's kindred and took the kingdom for
himself. When peace had settled upon it he took unto him a wife, and
Frigga blessed them with a fine little son, whom they named Volsung.
But while the boy was yet quite young Rerir, his father, went out to
the wars and was killed, and the Battle Maidens carried him away to
Odin and the festal halls of Valhalla.

The young Volsung grew mightily in valour and in strength, so that
when he had come to man's estate his renown was greater than that of
his father or grandfather, and all men knew him to be a true son of
the race of Odin.

So in due time he became the founder of a great family, and the
builder of a mighty house. The walls of his dwelling were hung with
battle shields taken from the foe, and in the midst of the floor

                                "Sprang up a mighty tree
    That reared its blessings roofward, and wreathed the roof-tree dear
    With the glory of the summer and the garland of the year."

Underneath the branches of this gigantic "Branstock," as the tree was
named, dwelt Volsung and his wife and their eleven children. Ten
stalwart sons had he and one fair daughter, Signy by name.

Now when Signy was become a tall and stately maiden, it came to pass
that Siggeir, King of the Goths, sent messages to beg that she might
be given to him in marriage. And because Volsung had heard a good
report of his success in war, he promised his daughter to him without
setting eyes upon his face.

But when he came to claim the promise, Signy saw that her bridegroom
was small and dark and evil of countenance, different indeed from the
tall, fair, open-faced Northmen, and her heart sank within her.

The sacred pledge had been given, however, and no Northland maiden
could draw back from the plighted word.

True to her hero-blood, Signy went through the marriage ceremony with
seeming cheerfulness, and none but her twin-brother Sigmund knew her
grief.

The wedding feast was celebrated with magnificence. Great fires burned
brightly along the hall, and the flickering flames cast a lurid glow
upon the huge oak which upreared its massive and fantastic shape in
the centre.

Now, while the merry-making was at its height, there suddenly entered
a tall, old man with hat slouched over his eyes and huge grey cloak
around his majestic shoulders.

Advancing to the Branstock, he drew his sword, and plunged it to the
very hilt in the great trunk.

Then, as the assembled guests gazed at him in awe-struck silence, he
said: "Whoso draweth the sword from this stock shall have the same as
a gift from me, and it shall give him victory in every battle."

There was something so attractive in the voice and mien of the speaker
that all men sat chained to their seats, as in a dream. And none
roused himself as the old man turned and passed through the hall and
out of the door.

But as soon as Odin, for he it was, had vanished, all tongues were
loosed and there arose a great hubbub. And the men of noblest rank
went up one after another to the Branstock and pulled and tugged and
strained at the goodly sword. First of all went up King Siggeir, but
though he pulled till his eyes nearly started from his head, yet the
sword moved not an inch.

Then Volsung put his hand to the sword, but it was not meant for him.
Neither could the Volsung princes, who followed one by one, do aught
to move it, until last of them came Sigmund, the youngest, and as soon
as he grasped the hilt he pulled the weapon out of the trunk as if it
had lain loose therein.

It was indeed a weapon worthy of the gods, and when Siggeir looked
upon its shapely proportions his heart was fired with desire, and he
offered to buy it from the youth at thrice its weight in gold.

But Sigmund answered: "Thou mightst have taken the sword as easily as
I if it had been thy lot to wear it. But now it has fallen to me, thou
shalt never have it, though thou dost offer all the gold thou hast."

And thus began the fatal quarrel between the race of Siggeir and the
Volsungs, for at the words Siggeir's heart grew bitter against
Sigmund; and he determined that, when the time was ripe, he would put
an end to the Volsung race and take that sword to himself.

But outwardly Siggeir was all that was fair and gentle. And when he
set sail with his bride to his own land, he begged King Volsung and
his sons to visit him as soon as possible.

So, at an appointed time, King Volsung and his ten stalwart sons set
off to the kingdom of Siggeir with three brave ships; and after a fair
voyage they cast anchor late one eventide.

During the night, as they lay on their ships, thinking to land next
morning, Signy, who had received tidings of their arrival, came in
secret to her father and brothers and begged them not to go ashore,
saying that her treacherous husband had laid an ambush for them,
whence they could not escape alive. She bade them therefore return to
their own land, and together, with a mighty army, come again to take
revenge upon King Siggeir.

But the brave old Volsung shook his great white head, saying that
never yet had he or his turned back before fire or sword or hurt--and
he would not play the coward in his old age.

"A hundred fights have I fought," said he, "and ever I had the
victory, nor shall it be said of me that I fled from a foe or prayed
for peace."

Then Signy wept right sore, and prayed that she might stay with her
kinsmen, and not return to her husband.

But this seemed not good in the eyes of Volsung, and he sent her back
sadly to her home.

As soon as it was day, King Volsung went ashore with his folk, and all
were fully armed. But that availed them little; for Siggeir fell upon
them with a great army. The Volsungs were few in number, but they
fought with desperate courage, and no fewer than eight times did they
cut their way through their foes. They would have done so yet again,
had not Volsung fallen in the midst of his folk, and his followers
with him, save only his ten sons.

Then the princes were taken and led, fast bound, into the presence of
Siggeir, who had watched the fight from afar; and when he had secured
the sword of Odin he condemned the young men to die.

But Signy, wild with grief, besought her husband: "I will not pray
thee to spare their lives, but let them be first set awhile in the
forest, chained fast to a fallen oak; for there comes to me an old
saying--_'Sweet to eye while eye can see.'_ I pray not for longer life
for them, because well I know that my prayer will avail nothing."

At this Siggeir laughed an evil laugh: "Surely thou art mad," he said,
"to wish that the suffering of thy brothers should be prolonged. I
care not, however, for the more pain they have to bear the better
shall I be pleased."

So the ten young men were chained to an oak in the woods with a heavy
beam upon their feet, and Signy meantime was shut up in the palace
under close watch, lest she should try to succour them.

Now it came to pass that at midnight there came up a great she-wolf
out of the wild woods, and she fell upon one of the brothers and
devoured him and went upon her way.

Next morning Signy sent a trusty servant to bring tidings of her
brothers, and grievously she mourned when she heard that one was dead;
for she feared that the same fate would overtake all.

Every morning she sent the man to the forest, and every morning he
returned with the news that the she-wolf had eaten up another of the
Volsung princes, until all save Sigmund were dead. Then Signy, in dire
despair, bethought herself of a plan, and she sent the messenger with
honey in his hand to her twin-brother, and bade him smear it over
Sigmund's face and feet and a little of it in his mouth. And it was
done as she commanded.

And that same night, as Sigmund sat alone in the wild woods, the
she-wolf came up, according to her wont, and would have slain and
eaten him like his brothers. But first she smelt the honey and began
to lick his face all over, and finally thrust her tongue into his
mouth.

Then Sigmund caught the she-wolf's tongue in his strong teeth and held
fast to it; and she, in her pain and terror, set her feet against the
beam and against the oak, and strained so mightily that beam and oak
gave way, and the chain that bound the prince snapped in twain. And
springing up, he killed the murderer of his brothers, that gaunt
she-wolf, and ran through the wild woods a free man.

Now when Signy knew what had happened she was full of joy; and as her
husband thought that all the Volsungs were dead, and so kept watch
over her no longer, she was able to visit her brother where he lay
hiding in secret. Together they built for him a hut underground in the
wild woods, and they covered up the entrance with branches, moss, and
leaves, so that it was quite hidden from sight. To this retreat Signy
brought food and all things that were needed, and together in secret
they made plans to revenge their father and his nine brave sons.

Now to Siggeir and Signy had been born two sons who, both in nature
and in face, were exactly like their father. When the eldest was ten
years of age, his mother sent him to Sigmund, that he might be trained
by a Volsung to avenge the death of his grandfather.

Late at eventide he came to the earth-dwelling, and when Sigmund had
welcomed the boy he bade him make ready the bread for their evening
meal. "For I," said he, "must go seek firewood." And with these words
he gave the meal bag into his hands and left the hut.

But he could see no trace of any bread making when he came back, so he
asked if the food was ready.

"No," said the boy, "I dared not set hand in the meal sack, because I
saw something move in the meal."

Then Sigmund knew that the boy had the heart of a mouse, and he sent
him back to his mother.

The next winter Signy sent her second son to him, and Sigmund tested
him in like manner. But he too showed his coward's heart, and was sent
home again.

As time went on Signy had another son, whom she called Sinfiotli. He
was tall and strong and fair of face, like unto the Volsungs; and
before he was ten years of age, she sent him to Sigmund. But first she
tested him herself by sewing his shirt to his skin and then suddenly
snatching it off again, whereat the child did but laugh at her,
saying: "Full little would a Volsung care for such a smart as that."

So the boy came to Sigmund, who bade him knead the meal while he went
to fetch firewood.

This time the bread stood ready baked upon the hearth when he came
back, whereupon he asked Sinfiotli if he had found nothing in the
meal.

"Ay," said the boy, "I saw there was something living in the meal when
I first began to knead it; but I have kneaded all together, both the
meal and whatever was therein."

Then Sigmund gave a great laugh, and caught the boy in his arms,
saying: "Naught wilt thou eat of this bread to-night, for thou hast
kneaded up therewith the most deadly of serpents."

Though no sting from outside could harm Sinfiotli, he could neither
eat nor drink venom and live. But Sigmund could eat of the bread,
since no poison could harm him.

From that day the training of the lad became Sigmund's constant care,
and he grudged no pains in the effort to make him worthy of a
Volsung's teaching.

In his desire to make him hardy and daring beyond his years he took
Sinfiotli with him on all his expeditions. Together they lived the
wild life of outlaws, faring far and wide through the woods, and
slaying men for their wealth. And the boy forgot his father and
thought as a Volsung.

Now it befell that on a day, as they roamed through the woods, they
came upon a certain house, wherein lay two men, with great gold rings
on wrists and ankles, fast asleep. Over their heads hung the skins of
two grey wolves, and by this Sigmund knew that they were king's sons
who had been turned into were-wolves. Every tenth night would they
come out of their wolf skins and return to them again at dawn.

Then did Sigmund and Sinfiotli, half in jest, put on the wolf skins
while the men lay asleep; and having done this they could in nowise
rid themselves of them till the appointed time. They rushed forth
howling as wolves howl, though each knew the meaning of the sound, and
they lay out in the wild woods all that night.

Next morning each prepared to go his separate way to seek food, and
first they made a compact that they would risk the attack of seven
men; but if more set upon them, each would howl for the other in
wolfish wise.

"For thou art young and over-bold," said Sigmund, "and men will think
well of themselves when they take thee."

Then each went his way, but before Sigmund had gone far he was
attacked by a band of eight men. Then he gave forth the long wolf
howl, and Sinfiotli came and slew them all, and returned his way
again.

A few hours later eleven men met Sinfiotli in the woods and tried to
kill him, but he fought them in such wise that they were all slain.
Then, being weary, he crawled under an oak to take his rest. Soon came
Sigmund, and seeing the dead men lying on the ground, he asked: "Why
didst thou not call for help?"

But Sinfiotli only yawned and said: "I was loth to call on thee to
help me slay so few as eleven men."

These words so offended Sigmund that he sprang upon Sinfiotli and bit
him in the throat so sorely that he lay dead upon the ground.

Then was Sigmund heavy at heart, for he had grown to love the boy, and
he cursed the wolf skin, from which he could not get free. With much
difficulty, however, he succeeded in dragging the body to the hut,
where he crouched beside it, howling for grief.

Now, as he sat, he saw two weasels come from behind a tree, and one
bit the other in the throat, so that it lay to all appearance dead
upon the ground. Then the first weasel ran into a thicket and brought
a leaf in its mouth and laid it upon the wound; and immediately its
companion sprang up and scampered off, perfectly cured. A moment later
a raven, in his flight overhead, dropped a leaf of the same kind at
Sigmund's feet.

Then he knew that Odin had sent to his aid, and he took the leaf and
drew it over Sinfiotli's hurt, and the lad sprang up quite well and
strong again.

So they lay down together in their earth-house till the time came to
put off their wolf skins; and then they burnt them with fire and
prayed the Asa folk to let no further harm come through the spell of
the evil shapes.

Now when Sinfiotli was grown to manhood, Sigmund having tried him
fairly and found him of true Volsung blood, plotted with him to avenge
his kinsmen and exact the penalty from King Siggeir. Wherefore, on a
certain day they left the earth-house and came to the palace of the
king; and they gained, unperceived, a lurking-place amongst the casks
of ale which were stacked in the entrance to the hall.

Now Signy and the king were sitting in the hall, and two of their
younger children were trundling a golden ball along the floor.
Suddenly a golden ring came off the ball and rolled behind the casks
of ale, and the little ones ran after it and discovered the two big,
grim men with helmets on their heads and swords in their hands.

Screaming with fright the children rushed to their father with news of
what they had seen.

Then the king summoned his warriors, and a rush was made to where
Sigmund and Sinfiotli lay hidden. They were quickly surrounded; and
though they fought desperately, they were taken and fast bound.

That night the king pondered what would be the worst and most
lingering death he could mete out to them; and when morning came he
ordered a great hollow mound of stones and turf to be made, with a
large flat stone, extending from wall to wall, in the midst; and he
ordered the prisoners to be buried alive, one on each side of this
stone, so that they could hear each other speak but might in nowise
pass through to one another.

Now, while the servants were closing in the mound, came Signy along
with a bundle of straw in her arms, and this she cast down to
Sinfiotli, bidding the men say nothing of this to the king; and they
promised, and set the topmost stones, and left the two to die.

Presently Sinfiotli called to Sigmund and said: "I at anyrate shall
not starve for awhile, for the queen has thrown in a lump of swine's
flesh wrapped in straw."

A moment later he gave a shout of joy, for hidden in the meat he found
the magic sword of Sigmund, which he knew by the hilt, for Sigmund had
often talked to him of this weapon.

He now drove the point with all his strength into the big stone, and
it passed quite through, so that Sigmund caught the point and pulled
to and fro; and in this wise they sawed right through that mighty
stone, and stood together in the mound. But they stayed not there, for
with that good sword they soon cut their way through stones and iron
and turf.

Then, very softly, they crept to the king's hall where all men slept,
and set wood around it; and having secured the door they set fire to
the wood.

It was not long ere the folk within were awakened by the smoke and
flames, and the king cried out: "Who kindled this fire in which I
burn?"

"I," replied Sigmund, "with Sinfiotli, my sister's son, that you may
know well that all the Volsungs are not yet dead."

Then he entreated his sister to come out into a place of safety; but
she would not. "Merrily now will I die with King Siggeir, though I was
not merry to wed him," said she, and she perished in the fire with her
husband and his men.

Sigmund and Sinfiotli now gathered together folk and ships and
returned to the land of the Volsungs, where they were warmly welcomed.

And thus ended the great feud between the Volsungs and the Goths.




CHAPTER XVI

How Sigmund Fought His Last Battle

_This is the tale the Northmen tell of how Sigmund took
Hiordis to wife, and was slain of the might of Odin._


Now Sigmund in course of time became the greatest king of all the
Volsungs; and Sinfiotli was the captain of his host.

And it came to pass that Sinfiotli loved a fair woman and desired to
have her for his wife; but the brother of Sigmund's queen was also in
love with her. So they fought together in a distant land, and
Sinfiotli slew his rival.

Many another battle did he fight, until he had become renowned above
all men; and in the autumn-tide he turned home again.

And when he had told all his news to King Sigmund he went to the
queen, and told how he had slain her brother in fair fight. Now when
she heard this the queen was wroth, and bade him begone from the
kingdom, nor would she listen to his words about the quarrel. But
Sigmund forbade him to depart, and, declaring that her brother had
been slain in fair fight, offered to his wife much gold in atonement
for the unhappy deed.

Then the queen, seeing that her will was not likely to prevail, bowed
her head, and said: "Have thy way in this matter, my lord, for it is
right that so it should be."

But in her heart she harboured evil thoughts against Sinfiotli. Then
she held a funeral feast for her dead brother, and bade thither many
great men.

And at that feast, as was the custom in those days, the queen carried
horns of mead to the chief guests. And when she came to Sinfiotli in
his turn she put the mighty horn into his hands, saying, with a smile:
"Come now and drink, fair nephew."

But Sinfiotli looked therein and said: "Nay; for there is a charm
within the mead."

"Give it to me," quoth Sigmund, when he heard those words. And he took
the horn and drank off the mead.

But the queen's face darkened, and she taunted Sinfiotli, saying:
"Must other men quaff thy drink for thee?"

And she came a second time and gave the horn into his hands, saying:
"Art thou a coward after all? Come now and drink."

But he looked into the horn, and lo: "Guile is in the drink," said he.

Sigmund again seized the vessel, saying: "Give it then to me," and
drank the full draught.

Then the queen came to Sinfiotli a third time, and mocked him, saying:
"How is this that thou fearest to take thy mead like a man? If thou
hast the heart of a Volsung, drink now thy portion."

But again he looked on the horn, and said: "Venom is therein."

Now Sigmund by this time was weary of drinking, and he said: "Pour it
through thy beard then, and all will be well." But Sinfiotli mistook
his meaning, and thought he desired him to drink the mead; and he
drank, and straightway fell down dead to the ground.

Then the heart of Sigmund was full of grief at his kinsman's end. He
would let no man touch him, but took him in his arms and fared away to
the wild woods and so to the seashore. And behold, there was an old
man sitting in a little boat; on his head was a grey hat pulled well
over his face, and over his shoulders a blue-grey cloak.

"Wilt thou be ferried across the bay?" asked the old man; and Sigmund
bowed his head. But the boat was too little to carry all at once; so
Sinfiotli was laid therein and Sigmund stood by on the shore.

A moment later both boat and ferryman had vanished from before his
eyes.

Then Sigmund knew that All-Father Odin had himself come for his
kinsman and had carried him to the halls of Asgard, and, after he had
mused awhile upon what had befallen, he returned to his folk; but
because of the wrong that she had done he would not look upon his
queen again, and soon afterwards she died.

Now there lived in a neighbouring kingdom a mighty and famous king,
who had a daughter named Hiordis; and she was the fairest and wisest
of women. And it came to pass that King Sigmund heard it told of her
that she was the only woman who was fitted to be his wife; and he made
a journey to the court of the king her father, and looked on her and
loved her. And her father listened graciously to his proposal that he
should marry his daughter.

But at that same time came King Lygni, son of Hunding; and he also
demanded the hand of Hiordis in marriage. And the king, fearful lest
trouble should come, called his daughter, and said: "Full wise art
thou, my daughter, and it is fitting that thou alone shalt choose thy
husband. Say now which of these two kings thou wilt have, and I will
abide by thy choice."

And Hiordis said: "I will choose King Sigmund, though he is old and
stricken in years, for the greater valour has been his."

So to him she was betrothed, and King Lygni was obliged to depart. And
in due time a great wedding feast was made, and Sigmund and Hiordis
were married with all the rites customary in the Northland, after
which they returned to Sigmund's own kingdom.

But within a few months news was brought that King Lygni had gathered
together a vast army, and was marching upon the Volsungs with intent
to destroy them utterly. So King Sigmund hastily got together his
fighting men and went out to his enemy, and they met in an open space
in the middle of a wood. And Hiordis carried away the king's treasure
and hid herself in the wood with her handmaid, in a place from whence
she could watch the fight.

The Vikings that came up from the sea were greater in number by far
than the warriors of Sigmund. But Sigmund was a host in himself, and
all the fierce strength of the Volsungs was in his arm that day.
Wherever he went his foes made way before him, and full many were the
Vikings who fell by his magic sword. But the king, who was the father
of his wife, was killed in the foremost rank.

Now, when the battle had raged for a long time, suddenly a strange
warrior, tall of form, with slouched hat upon his head, and blue-grey
cloak about his shoulders, was seen making his way through the press
to where Sigmund towered above the host of those who came against him.
Soon he confronted Sigmund, and his flashing weapon whirled like a
flail ere it descended. The Volsung king lifted his magic sword to
ward off the blow, but it fell with terrific force upon the blade and
broke it in two pieces. From that moment the fortune of the battle
turned against the Volsungs, and they fell fast around their king. But
Sigmund stood as in a trance, and the war rage faded from his face.
All-Father Odin had come to claim the sword he had given all those
many years ago, and had left him defenceless against the foe who now
pressed hot upon him.

    "And there they smote down Sigmund, the wonder of all lands,
    On the foemen, on the death-heap his deeds had piled that day."

When he saw that his rival had fallen, King Lygni made for the king's
abode, meaning to take both queen and treasure for himself. But he
found all empty and silent within. Then, thinking that he had slain
every one of the Volsung race, and that he need dread them no more, he
went through the kingdom to take possession of it.

When night had fallen upon the scene of bloodshed, Hiordis crept out
of the thicket and searched among the dead for her beloved Sigmund.
Presently she found him lying, and the life was still in him; and
taking him in her arms she thought to staunch his wounds. But with
faint voice he said: "War have I waged as long as it was Odin's will,
but never will I draw sword again, since the blade he gave me has
broken in two. My good fortune has departed, and I will not suffer
myself to be healed."

Then Hiordis wept sore and answered: "Naught would I care if but one
Volsung was left to avenge thee and my father."

And Sigmund said: "A son shall be born to thee who shall be mightier
than I. Our boy shall be the noblest and most famed of all the Volsung
race. See to it that thou keep the pieces of my good sword, for from
it he shall fashion a goodly blade, and shall work many a great work
therewith, and his name shall abide and flourish as long as the world
shall endure.

"But now am I weary, and would fain go to join my kindred that have
gone before me."

All through the night Hiordis kept watch beside him, till, at the
dawn, he died.

And as the queen mourned over the lifeless body she heard the sound of
many ships upon the seashore, and she said to her handmaid: "Let us
now exchange garments and flee into the woods, and do thou play the
part of king's daughter, and I will be thy handmaid."

Then there came up a great band of Vikings from the shore, and their
leader was Alf, son of the King of Denmark. And they saw how a great
company of men lay slain, and also how two women had escaped into the
woods.

So Alf bade his followers go seek the maidens, and bring them before
him. This they did, and when he questioned them, the handmaid spoke as
though she were queen, and answered for both, and told of the fall of
King Sigmund, and who it was who had brought the war trouble into the
land.

Then the prince asked if they knew where the wealth of the king was
hidden, and the maiden replied: "Ay, we know full well where it is
laid."

And she guided them to the place, and this pleased the prince, and he
put the treasure aboard his ships, and took the women also with him.
But first he gave ear to the tale of Sigmund, and it won his
admiration, and he caused the king to be buried as beseemed his rank
and valour.

Then did Hiordis and the handmaid sail away with Alf to his own land.




CHAPTER XVII

The Story of the Magic Gold

_This is the tale the Northmen tell of how
Sigurd was nurtured in Denmark._


When Hiordis and her handmaid came to the kingdom of Prince Alf, they
were treated with all honour and goodwill. But soon the queen-mother
of Prince Alf called him to her and said:

"Tell me, my son, why the fairer of these women has the fewer rings
and the commoner garments? For methinks that she whom you have held of
least account is the nobler of the two."

And he answered: "I, too, have had my doubts, since she is little like
a bond-servant, and when we first met she greeted me in noble wise.
But let us make trial of the matter."

So it came to pass that, as they sat at table, the prince said: "How
is it that you know the hour for rising in the winter mornings, seeing
that there are then no lights in heaven?"

And the handmaid, who was playing the part of mistress, forgot
herself, and answered: "At a certain hour I was ever wont to drink
milk before wending to feed the cows; and now that I no longer do
this, I still awake thereby at that self-same time."

At this the prince laughed aloud, saying: "That is ill manners for a
king's daughter."

Then he turned to Hiordis and asked her the same question, and she
answered unthinkingly: "My father once gave me a little gold ring of
such a nature that it grows cold on my finger in the day-dawning; and
that is the sign by which I know it is time to rise."

Then the prince sprang up, saying: "Gold rings for a bond-maid! Come
now, thou has deceived me, for I perceive that thou art a king's
daughter."

So the queen told him the whole truth, and then was she held in the
greatest honour.

Soon after, Prince Alf succeeded to his father's throne and became
King of Denmark, and about this time a fair son was given to Hiordis,
as had been foretold by Sigmund, his father. His hair was fair as the
morning light and his eyes were keen and blue.

And when, as happened shortly afterwards, the king married Hiordis,
the young Sigurd, as he was named, was brought up at the palace, with
all care and love, as the king's foster-son. Tall and straight did he
grow, and very comely of countenance; and there was no man but loved
him.

In due time the young prince was sent to Regin, the wisest man in that
realm, to be taught by him.

So old was he that none could recall his first coming to the land, and
his wisdom embraced all things known to men. He had great skill in all
the arts of peace, but chiefly was he famed for the mighty works he
had wrought at the forge and upon the anvil.

    "The Master of the Masters in the smithying craft was he;
    And he dealt with the wind and the weather and the stilling of
        the sea."

But though he was so wise, he had an evil heart, and he soon
determined to use the young Sigurd for his own ends.

So one day he began to instil a spirit of discontent within the lad,
asking him if he knew how much wealth his father Sigmund had and who
now had it in charge.

And the boy answered: "The king himself has it in charge."

"Dost thou then trust him so utterly?" sneered Regin.

"It is but right he should have it so," answered Sigurd, "for he knows
better how to guard it than I."

So Regin waited awhile, and then tried again, saying: "Surely it is a
marvellous thing that thou, a king's son, should run about on thy feet
like a horse-boy, and do the bidding of King Alf!"

"That is not so," said Sigurd, "for I have my way in all things, and
whatever I desire is granted to me."

"Well, then," said Regin, "ask for a horse for thyself."

"Yes," said the boy; "and that shall I have when I have need of such a
thing."

After this Sigurd went to the king, who smiled on him and said: "What
wilt thou of me?"

And Sigurd said: "I would have a horse of my very own."

To which the king replied: "Choose for thyself a horse from any part
of the kingdom it seems good to thee."

So Sigurd went away to the wild woods to consider where he should
search for the finest steed in all the world; and as he pondered he
met in the way a tall, old man, with a grey hat drawn over his
forehead and a grey-blue cloak about his shoulders, who asked him
where he was going.

"I want to choose a horse," said Sigurd. "Come thou with me, old man,
and give me thy counsel."

So they went together to a meadow where all the finest horses in the
king's dominions were feeding, in charge of the royal grooms. And the
stranger said: "See now, let us drive all these horses into the deeps
of the river and choose the one that best can cross the foaming tide."

And this they did. And it came to pass that, because of the strong
swirl of the waters, all but one of the horses turned back and
scrambled again to land.

But one not only breasted the tide as though it were still water, but,
having gained the opposite bank, he raced round the meadow as though
he were a colt. Then plunging into the river again he swam back quite
easily and rejoined his companions.

"That is the horse that I will choose," said young Sigurd, and running
out, he caught the beautiful creature by the mane. Young of years was
he, grey of colour, and very great and fair of limb; and as yet no man
had thrown foot across his back.

Then said the old man: "This horse is of the kin of Sleipnir, the
steed of Odin. Nourish him well, for he will prove the best of horses
to thee."

And with those words he vanished.

Then Sigurd called the steed Greyfell, and he proved, as Odin had
promised, the best of all horses in the world.

And after awhile Regin spoke again to Sigurd and said: "It grieves me
sore to see thee in this poor and humble guise at the court. But thou
art a brave lad, and I will tell thee where there is much wealth to be
won, as well as fame and honour in the winning of it, if thou wilt."

These words roused Sigurd's curiosity, and he asked where that wealth
might be, and who had watch and ward over it.

And Regin answered: "Fafnir is his name, and he lies not so far away,
on a lonely waste of heath. And when thou comest to that place, thou
mayest well say that thou hast never seen or heard of such abundance
of treasure."

"But I have already heard of Fafnir," said Sigurd thoughtfully. "Is
he not the most terrible of dragons, so huge and evil that no man dare
go out against him?"

"Not so," said the cunning Regin, "he is like unto other dragons of
his kind. Men make too great a tale about him, that is all. But there,
thy forefathers would have thought nothing of such a beast, but 'tis
hardly to be expected that thou, though thou be of Volsung blood,
shall have the heart and mind of those great ones whose deeds of fame
still ring throughout the lands."

Then Sigurd grew angry. "Why shouldst thou lay on me the name of
coward, who am yet but a child?" he said. "I have had as yet no chance
to win renown. And tell me, why dost thou egg me on to this so
strongly?"

"Hundreds of years ago," replied Regin, "when I was but a boy, I lived
in the house of my father Hreidmar, the king of the dwarfs. His eldest
son was named Fafnir, his second Otter, and I was the youngest and
least; for I could never wield a sword in battle, though I was a
cunning worker in iron and silver and gold. My brother Otter was
cleverer than I, for he was a great fisher, and excelled all other men
as such.

"By day he took the form of an otter, and dwelt in the river, and
brought fish in his mouth to the bank. He lived usually thus, coming
home only to eat and slumber, for on dry land he could see nothing.
But Fafnir was by far more grim, as he was greater than us all, and he
would have everything we possessed called his.

"Now in the waterfall hard by our house lived a dwarf called Andvari,
who had changed himself into the likeness of a pike; and this he did
that he might eat the smaller fishes, of which the river was full.

"And one day it came to pass that three of the Asa folk, Odin, Loki,
and Hoenir, being on a journey, came to Andvari's waterfall just as
Otter, having eaten a large salmon, was slumbering on the river bank.
When Loki saw him he took up a stone, and threw it with such force
that my brother fell dead on the ground. At this the Asas were well
content, for they did not know that he was a dwarf's son. And they
flayed off his skin and Loki carried it away with him, hanging it over
his shoulder.

"Now at eventide they came to the house of my father, and entered in,
suspecting no evil. But when Loki, coming last, threw his burden on
the floor, the dwarf king recognised the skin, and his face grew
black with rage. Before the Asas could defend themselves or flee, he
made signs to his servants who bound them fast in the midst of the
floor.

"Then the Asas asked what ransom they should pay, and Hreidmar
answered and said: 'In the depth of the waterfall lies the Flame of
the Waters, the Gold of the Sea, hidden there by the dwarfs, and
called by men Andvari's Hoard. Find this for me, and fill with it the
otter skin, and cover it outside with the same red gold, and then, and
then only, will I let you go free.'

"Now this was a heavy ransom indeed, for not only was Andvari's hoard
hidden cunningly away, but the otter skin had the property of
stretching itself to an enormous size.

"The Asas, however, determined to do their best, and they sent Loki,
who was set free for the purpose, to find the Magic Gold.

"So Loki went down to the river bank and peered and poked and
searched. This he did for days, but nowhere could he discover either
the dwarf Andvari or his hoard. At length he noticed a wonderfully
fine pike, with gills of gold, which each day sported in the foam of
the waterfall, and he suspected that this was the dwarf in the form of
a fish.

"So he went to Ran, the goddess of the sea, and borrowed her magic
net, and taking this to the waterfall he cast it therein; and the pike
swam into the net and was caught. Then said Loki:

    "What fish of all fishes
    Swims strong in the flood,
    But hath learnt little wit to unfold?
    Thine head must thou buy
    If fate thou would'st fly,
    And find me the water's red gold."

"The dwarf now resumed his proper form, and answered sulkily:

    "Andvari folk call me,
    A dwarf is my father,
    And deep in the fall is my home.
    For of ill-luck a fay
    This fate on me lay,
    Through wet ways ever to roam."

"Slowly, and very reluctantly, the dwarf accepted the situation; but
at last he consented to yield up the golden hoard as ransom for his
life, and diving into the depths of the waterfall he brought up
thence, little by little, his marvellous pile of treasure.

"Last of all he laid upon the bank, which now shone like a sea of
gold, the glittering Helmet of Dread and a massive breastplate, all of
the precious metal.

"'This is the full measure,' said he, as he laid his burden at Loki's
feet.

"But Loki caught sight of a ring gleaming upon his thumb. 'Give me
also that ring,' said he.

"Now this ring was a talisman and had the power of attracting to it
all precious metal like itself; therefore Andvari would not part with
it.

"Then Loki snatched the ring from him with a wicked laugh, and went
his way chuckling. But Andvari crept into a cleft of the rocks, and
from thence called out angry curses upon him.

    "That gold hoard of mine
    Shall be to all thine
    A cause of dissension and woe;
    And no good at all
    Shall ever befall
    The man to whose hands it shall go."

"Meanwhile, Loki had carried the treasure to Hreidmar, and they placed
it on the otter skin, which ever stretched and widened, so that, with
all that large store, one hair of the bristle remained uncovered. And
on this Loki placed the magic ring, that was called 'Andvari's Loom,'
because it made much gold, and at last the skin was entirely covered.
Then Loki chanted:

    "Gold enow, gold enow,
    A great treasure hast thou,
    That our heads on our necks we may hold,
    But thou and thy son,
    Are now both undone,
    For a curse has been placed on the gold."

"Now scarcely had the Asas departed than the curse began to work. For
though Hreidmar watched night and day over the treasure, it was plain
that Fafnir coveted it. At last he slew his father, and having thus
obtained possession of the hoard he donned the Helmet of Dread and the
glittering breastplate, and," said Regin, "he drove me out when I came
to claim my share, and bade me get my bread as best I could.

"And so evil did Fafnir grow with gloating over the treasure,
begrudging any man a share in his wealth, that he took the shape of a
vile dragon, and to this day he lies brooding over his hoard.

"As for me, I went to the king, who made me master smith."

    "Hast thou hearkened, Sigurd? Wilt thou help a man that is old
    To avenge him for his father? Wilt thou win the treasure of gold
    And be more than the kings of the earth? Wilt thou rid the earth of
        a wrong
    And heal the woe and the sorrow my heart hath endured o'er long?"

Then Sigurd answered: "Much wrong has been thine and exceeding evil
has thy kinsman been to thee. Make me, therefore, a sword by thy
craft, such as none has ever been made before; and with it I will go
forth to slay this mighty dragon."

"Trust me well in that task," said Regin, "and with that same sword
shalt thou slay Fafnir."




CHAPTER XVIII

How Sigurd Slew the Dragon

_This is the tale the Northmen tell of how Sigurd slew
Fafnir and Regin with the Magic Sword._


Regin set to work, and exercising all his skill as a cunning worker in
metals he fashioned a sword, very fine and keen and strong, and this
he brought to Sigurd.

Sigurd received it with joy, but the weapon which was to slay Fafnir
must be severely tested; and, raising it aloft, the youth smote with
all his might upon the iron anvil, and the sword broke in pieces.

"Behold thy sword, O Regin!" he laughed.

Then Regin forged another sword and said: "Surely thou wilt be content
with this, though thou be hard to please in the matter of a weapon."

But again Sigurd struck upon the anvil, and again the sword fell to
pieces. Then he turned wrathfully to Regin: "Art thou also a liar and
a traitor like thy father and brother?"

And thus saying he went to his mother, and seating himself at her
feet, he began: "Is it true, my mother, that Sigmund, my father, gave
thee the Magic Sword of Odin in two pieces?"

"That is true enough," said she.

Then Sigurd entreated: "Give them then to me, I pray thee, for only in
such wise shall I get a sword to my mind."

Then the queen knew that he looked to win great fame with that weapon,
and she gave him the pieces; and he took them to Regin and bade him
make a sword therefrom.

And though Regin's evil heart was wroth because of the words that the
youth had spoken, he dared not refuse. So he set to work, and when he
carried the finished sword from out the forge, it seemed to his
helpers that fire burned along its edges.

"Take thy sword," said the old man, "and if this fails, I have lost my
skill in sword-making."

This time when Sigurd smote upon the anvil the keen steel clove into
the metal right up to the hilt, and he pulled it out unhurt. Then he
went to the river and flung up-stream a tuft of wool, and when the
tide carried the wool against the edge of the sword it was cut in two.
And then was Sigurd satisfied and his heart rejoiced.

Upon his return Regin met him. "Now that I have made thee this good
sword," said he, "wilt thou, for thy part, keep thy word, and go
against Fafnir the dragon?"

"Surely will I do that thing," said Sigurd, "but first I must avenge
my father."

So he went to the king, and bowing before him said: "Here have I now
lived all my lifetime, and thanks and gratitude are owing from me to
you, with all due honour. But now will I go hence to meet the sons of
Hunding, that they may know that the Volsungs are not all dead; and I
would have your goodwill go with me upon the journey."

The king approved of Sigurd's spirit, and said he would give him
whatsoever he desired; and therewith a great army was prepared, with
ships and weapons, so that he might proceed on his journey in due
state and power. And Sigurd himself steered the ship with the dragon's
head, which was the finest of the fleet.

At first they ran before a fair wind; but after a few days there arose
a great storm, and the sky and sea were red like blood. And as they
sailed close along the shore, a certain man hailed them and asked who
was captain of that array; and they told him that their chief was
Sigurd, son of Sigmund, on his way to win fame for himself.

And the stranger said: "There is none like Sigurd, son of Sigmund, on
this earth; so now, I pray thee, take me on board."

So they made for land and took the man aboard. Old he was and
one-eyed; and his grey hat was slouched far over his face. And Sigurd
saw that he was no ordinary traveller, and asked therefore if he could
tell, before ever they reached land, what their fate would be on those
stormy waters and in the battle that was to come.

Then said the Traveller: "Thou shalt land safe and sound, and victory
shall be thine in the fight if thou shalt see these signs: First, a
raven sitting on a tree; next, two warriors coming into the courtyard
to meet thee, when the tramp of thy feet is heard; third, a wolf
howling under boughs of ash. But see to it, that none of thy warriors
look at the moon as she sets, nor trip up their feet as they march out
to meet their foe. Let each warrior be well washed, well combed, and
well fed--and if all these things come to pass, then have no fear as
to who shall win the day."

Even as he spoke the wind abated, and the waves were stilled, and the
ships were thenceforth wafted by friendly breezes to the shores of the
realm of the sons of Hunding. But the instant they landed the
mysterious stranger vanished, and by this Sigurd knew that once again
he had been visited by All-Father Odin; and he went on his way
rejoicing.

And as he passed up the strand a raven sitting upon a tree croaked at
him; a short way farther on a wolf crouched howling under an ash; and
as he approached the court of the king, the two sons of Hunding
advanced from the courtyard to see what was meant by the tramp of
armed men.

Now the news of the coming of the strangers soon spread far and wide
over the land, and the people rose with one accord in defence of Lygni
their king.

So he advanced upon Sigurd with a vast host, and an exceedingly fierce
fight began. Skulls were split, helmets shivered, and shields cut in
two, full many times ere that day's work was done. Ever in the front
of the fight rode Sigurd, with his good sword flashing, and
wheresoever he went his foes fell back before him, for his like had
never been seen by any man.

Then came against him the sons of Hunding, and Sigurd smote them down,
one after the other, beginning with Lygni the king, until there were
none left, and very few of their folk.

Then away sailed Sigurd, flushed with victory, to his mother and his
stepfather, by whom he was received with much honour. But when he had
been at home a little while, Regin came to him and said: "Perhaps now
thou wilt have leisure to keep thy word and humble the crest of Fafnir
to the earth, since thou hast avenged thy father and others of the
Volsung kin."

And Sigurd answered: "That will I hold to, for I have pledged my
word."

So it came to pass that Sigurd and Regin rode together to the heath
where Fafnir dwelt; and they passed along the way by which the dragon
was wont to creep down to the water to drink. So long was this
terrible creature that he would lie crouched on a cliff sixty feet
high when he drank of the water below. When Sigurd saw the huge tracks
that he had made he said to Regin: "Sayest thou that this dragon is no
greater than other such beasts? Methinks he leaves tracks behind him
that are strangely well marked."

"There is naught to fear," said Regin. "Make thee a hole and sit down
in it, and when the dragon comes to drink, smite him through the
heart, and so shalt thou win for thyself great fame."

"But," said Sigurd, "what will happen when the burning blood of the
dragon falls upon me?"

Now Regin well knew that no man could endure that frightful stream and
live, and he wished to make an end of Sigurd when he had slain the
beast. Therefore he answered wrathfully: "Of what use is it to give
advice if thou art fearful of everything? Not like thy kin art thou,
careless of perils."

With this undeserved taunt he rode away, for he himself was sore
afraid, and dared not abide the coming of the dragon.

So Sigurd rode alone over the heath, and when he came to the marks
where the tracks lay deep he began to dig a pit, as Regin had told
him. But while he was busy at work an old man, wearing a big grey hat
over his face, passed by and asked what he was doing. And when he had
been told, he said:

"That was no wise advice that was given thee. Rather dig trenches in
the midst of the dragon track, that the blood may run therein; and do
thou then crouch in one of these and run thy sword through his heart
as he drags his huge shape overhead."

And with these words he vanished.

Sigurd could not doubt the wisdom of this advice and he did as he had
been bidden; and when he heard the dragon approaching he hid himself,
his sword ready in his hand.

The roar of the dragon shook the earth for miles around, and Sigurd
saw streams of venom issuing from his jaws as he drew near. But this
did not affright him; he waited until the huge shape loomed overhead,
and then thrust his sword, with all the strength he could command, as
far as it would go into the loathsome breast.

Then followed a scene of violence beyond the power of words to
express. A great roar, which shook the very heavens, went up from the
cavernous throat, and well it was for Sigurd that he darted aside with
the quickness of light. The huge coils unwound and contracted again in
the monster's agony, and the furious lashing of his enormous tail
utterly destroyed the surrounding vegetation, while his cruel talons,
all powerless now to do aught else, ploughed deep furrows in the hard
and rocky soil. All nature seemed to be undergoing its final
convulsions in the few moments which elapsed ere the monster at length
lay limp and gasping in the last throes of death.

Then, with the voice of Fafnir the dwarf, he asked in feeble accents:
"Who art thou, and what is thy kin, that thou wast bold to lift weapon
against me?"

And his foe made answer: "Sigurd am I called, of Volsung kin."

Then Fafnir asked: "Who urged thee to this deed, O bright-eyed boy?"

And Sigurd replied: "A bold heart urged me, and a strong hand and
sharp sword aided me in the doing thereof."

But Fafnir's eyes were opened at the approach of death, and he said:
"Regin, my brother, has brought about my end, and even now he is
plotting to bring about thine also. Full soon shall the red gold of
Andvari's hoard begin to work thy destruction. I give thee counsel,
therefore, that thou ridest swiftly away without the gold; for often
it happens that he who gets a death wound is none the less avenged."

But Sigurd answered: "I will not follow thy counsel, but even now will
I rise to thy lair and take that great treasure which thou hast
hoarded there."

And Fafnir answered: "Have thine own will. Yet shalt that gold be a
curse to thee, and a curse to whosoever possesses it hereafter."

With this warning the loathsome creature breathed his last, and at the
same moment the sun broke through the clouds, casting a glamour over
the heath which only so lately had been the haunt of evil and a place
of desolation.

Now, when it was plain that nothing more was to be feared from the
dragon, came Regin from the place of safety where he lurked. And since
he feared lest Sigurd should claim the treasure as his reward for
slaying Fafnir, he began to accuse him of having murdered his kinsman,
and to remind him that, according to the law of the Northmen, he could
now require Sigurd's own life.

But Sigurd said: "I did but kill him at thy wish, O Regin, and with
the good sword that thou thyself did make for me."

"Ah yes," said the traitor warily, "it was my good sword and not thy
arm that has done the deed, and therefore no thanks are due to thee.
But now will I count thee guiltless of my brother's blood if thou wilt
cut out the heart of the dragon and give me to eat of it."

This Sigurd promised to do, and he made a fire and set about roasting
the heart of the monster upon a rod. But presently, as he felt the
heart to see if it were cooked enough, he burnt his fingers so
severely that at once he set them in his mouth to soothe the smart.
And the moment the heart-blood of Fafnir touched his tongue his ears
were open to the voices of the birds, and he understood the meaning of
their songs in the bushes hard by.

And this was what the woodpeckers sang, chuckling all the time: "There
thou sittest, Sigurd, roasting the heart of Fafnir for another,
whereas if thou ate it thyself thou wouldst become wisest of men."

And the swallows twittered: "See where lies Regin, who is in mind to
kill the man who trusts in him."

And the raven croaked: "Let Sigurd then cut off his head and so have
all the gold-hoard for his own."

And the eagle screamed: "Why did he not ride away with that hoard at
once? Then might he have found the hill where Brunhild lies."

And the owl hooted: "Ay, let him now take his chance and slay the man
who will surely kill him if he lets him live."

Then Sigurd arose, and he scrupled not to slay Regin; for he knew that
he was about to betray him unto his death.

Then once more the birds began to sing. And this time they sang with
glee of a warrior-maiden sleeping fast on a high mountain in the midst
of a ring of glittering flames; and through this fiery ring only the
bravest of heroes might pass and awake her from sleep.

    "On a mountain fell
    A warrior-maid fast sleeps
    Where a ring of flame
    Perfect safety keeps.
    None may take her hence
    Save a hero bold,
    For only at a hero's touch
    Will those fires burn cold."

Then was Sigurd fired with desire to find that fair maiden. So, after
partaking of the dragon's heart, he leapt on his horse and rode along
in the monster's tracks till he reached the place where, deep down in
the earth, the gold lay hoarded. And there he found the store of
treasure, which he placed in two great chests upon the back of his
good horse, meaning to walk along-side. But the horse would not stir a
foot until Sigurd, guessing what was in his mind, leapt upon his back;
whereat Greyfell galloped away at once as though he were carrying no
weight at all.




CHAPTER XIX

How Sigurd Won the Hand of Brunhild

_This is the tale the Northmen tell of how
Sigurd braved the flames, and what befell._


On and on, over level plain, by wild marshes, through winding ways,
galloped Greyfell, until at last he brought Sigurd to the foot of a
mountain that is called Hindfell. And before him, on the crest of that
height, he saw a great light as of a fire burning, so that the flames
seemed to touch the sky.

Riding up the slope Sigurd found himself at length face to face with a
ring of lurid fire, crackling and roaring with a noise like thunder.
But without a moment's hesitation he plunged into the very midst of
this.

Naught did he care for peril who had come to seek such prize, and, as
if daunted by the courage of the Volsung, the fierce flames shrank
back as he advanced, leaving ever a magic circle in which he rode
unscathed, while all around they roared like some hungry lion robbed
of its prey. They rose wave upon wave to the very sky, but their
fierce glare shone with glory upon Sigurd, and his form was as that of
the Sun-god when he rises from the ever-lasting hills at the dawn of
day.

And suddenly, as though their work was done, the flames flickered and
fell, leaving only a broad ring of pale ashes behind the hero as he
rode on to where loomed the massive shape of a great castle hung with
shields.

The doors of this castle stood wide open, and not a warrior was to be
seen; so, dismounting, Sigurd entered the great hall, and at first saw
no one--neither man, woman, nor child. But presently he came to a
room where he saw a figure, clad all in armour, lying stretched upon a
couch. Approaching thither, Sigurd removed the helmet, and saw, to his
astonishment, the face of a beautiful maiden fast asleep. He called to
her and tried to awaken her, but in vain. Then he cut off the
breastplate, which was fastened so closely that it seemed as though it
had grown into her flesh, and then the sleeves and the long steel
boots; and at length she lay before him in her garments of fine white
linen, over which fell long, thick tresses of golden hair. Sigurd bent
over her in admiration, and at that moment she opened her beautiful
eyes and gazed in wonder at his face. Then she arose, and looked with
joy at the rising sun, but her gaze returned to Sigurd; and the two
loved each other at first sight.

When they had communed tenderly together, Sigurd told who he was and
whence he came; and Brunhild rejoiced to hear the tale. "For," said
she, "none but a hero might pass through that ring of fire."

Then said Sigurd: "Tell me now, fair Brunhild, how thou camest to this
lonely fire-girt castle."

And she told him this tale:

"A warrior-maiden am I--chief of those Valkyrs who carry off the
valiant dead to the halls of Valhalla and ply them with mead at the
banquet. But many years ago I gave dire offence to All-Father Odin, as
thou shalt hear.

"Two kings had a quarrel, and determined to put their feud to the
issue of the sword. One was named Helm Gunnar. He was an old man and a
mighty warrior, and to him had Odin promised the victory.

"But for the other, young Agnar, my heart was filled with pity; and so
I disregarded the command of Odin and struck down Helm Gunnar in the
fight, the victory thus going to Agnar.

"Then did All-Father Odin, in his wrath, decree that I should be cast
out from Valhalla and be banished to the earth, there to find a
husband like any other maiden of Midgard. But I was sore afraid, for I
feared to mate with a coward--I, who had been a warrior-maiden from my
birth. And All-Father Odin was pitiful, and placed me in this castle
on Hindfell, and surrounded me with a barrier of flames, through which
none but a hero would dare to pass. But first he pierced me with the
Thorn of Sleep, that I might not grow old in the years of
waiting--that I should awake, as thou seest me, just as I was when I
began to sleep, at the touch of a brave man."

Then Sigurd told her all his story, and when she knew that he was
bound on adventurous quests she would not let him stay long by her
side, but bade him go forth and win honour for himself and afterwards
return to her again. Meantime she promised to await his return in the
castle, protected by the ring of flames, which should be rekindled on
his departure. "For none but Sigurd," said she, "will be brave enough
to make his way through such flames as these, and so shall I be safe
until thy return."

So Sigurd made ready to depart; but first he took Andvari's golden
ring, and placing it upon Brunhild's finger, as they stood together on
the mountain crest, he vowed to love none but her as long as his life
should last.




CHAPTER XX

How the Curse of the Gold is Fulfilled

_This is the tale the Northmen tell of how Sigurd
was foully slain in the land of the Niblungs._


Now when Sigurd had ridden far upon his way, he came to the land of
the Niblungs, a place of eternal mists, ruled over by Giuki and his
wife Grimhild. Three fine sons had they and one daughter, Gudrun, the
fairest maiden upon earth.

But Grimhild was a witch-wife--a fierce-hearted woman, learned in
magic and filled with crafty wile.

When they saw Sigurd riding into the courtyard with his glittering
armour and his burden of treasure, the king and queen said to one
another: "Surely one of the Asas has come hither; for the array of
this stranger shines with the gold-gleam, and his horse is mightier
than other horses, and the man himself excels in bearing all that we
have ever seen."

So the king went out with his court to greet Sigurd, and asked: "Who
art thou, who ridest into my kingdom without the leave of my sons, as
none have dared to do before?"

And he answered: "Sigurd am I, the son of Sigmund."

And the king said: "Be thou welcome here then, and take from our hands
whatsoever thou wilt have."

So for a time Sigurd lived in great honour at the court of the
Niblungs, from whence he fared forth upon many adventures with the
princes of that land, and ever was he foremost of them all.

During this time Brunhild was always in his memory, and he talked so
often of her that at length the evil heart of Grimhild, the queen, was
roused to jealousy. She bethought herself that, could he but be made
to forget the maiden of the Flaming Castle, he might marry Gudrun, her
daughter; and so all the wealth of Andvari's hoard might remain in the
court of the Niblungs for ever. On a day, therefore, she mixed a magic
potion, and gave it to Sigurd, saying:

"We have great joy in thy visit here, and would give thee the best
that we enjoy. Now take this horn, and drink therefrom."

So he drank with gladness; and from that moment all remembrance of
Brunhild was blotted from his mind, as though she had never been. And,
as the queen had hoped, he began to look with eyes of affection upon
Gudrun, the fair maiden whom he saw every day, so that the Niblung
princes, who had grown to love and honour Sigurd more and more, came
to him and said: "Great good thou hast brought us, Sigurd, and
exceeding strength thou givest to our realm. We pray thee therefore to
abide with us for ever, and thou shalt have rule in our land, and we
will give thee our sister in marriage, whom another man would not get
for all his prayers." Then the heart of the Volsung responded, and
they swore brotherhood together, even as if they were children of one
father and mother; and in due time Gudrun was married to Sigurd with
all joy and festivity.

Yet, in the midst of all this glee, a strange feeling oppressed the
heart of Sigurd. Some old memory seemed to be striving within him,
but, try as he would, he could not give it definite shape.

Time passed and King Giuki died, Gunnar, his son, succeeding him. And
as he had no wife, his mother, Grimhild, said: "Fair is thy life and
fortune, O my son, but one thing thou lackest. Go, seek for thyself a
wife who shall be a joy to thy house."

"But where can I find one who will be a worthy queen of the Niblungs?"
asked Gunnar.

And his mother answered: "Fair among the daughters of the earth and
bravest of warrior-maidens is Brunhild. In her Castle of Flames she
awaits the bridegroom who shall dare to penetrate the barrier of fire.
Go then, seek her out, and Sigurd will ride with thee."

So Gunnar and Sigurd arrayed themselves joyously and rode away, till
on the crest of a high mountain they saw a castle with a golden roof
and all about it a ring of flaming fire.

Then right eagerly they pricked their steeds, but all too long it
seemed ere they gained the summit. At length they reached the fiery
wall, and Gunnar put his tired horse at it without pause. But the
horse trembled and stood stock still. Again and again he tried him,
but always with the same result, until, at length, Gunnar cried to
Sigurd: "Lend me thy steed, Sigurd, for mine will not brave this
fire."

"With all my heart," replied Sigurd, leaping off Greyfell. But when
Gunnar had mounted the horse, Greyfell would not stir, and he too
trembled before the flames.

Then Gunnar sprang to earth, and stamped with impatience, for he
thought it shame to go afoot into the presence of the maid. Presently
he remembered that his witch-mother had given him a magic potion which
would enable a man to take the face and form of another at will. So he
proposed that Sigurd should take his appearance and win Brunhild for
him by proxy, for he knew that Greyfell would dare anything with his
beloved master astride his back.

Remembering naught, Sigurd eagerly accepted the mission, and when he
had drunk of the potion prepared by Gunnar he leaped again upon the
back of Greyfell, who sprang at once into the heart of the fire.

Then the flames roared with a thunderous sound, and shot up high into
the sky; but next moment they died away into a heap of grey ashes, and
Sigurd, unharmed, entered the hall where Brunhild sat and waited for
her faithless lover.

As he entered she started up with a cry of joy, which quickly died
away when, in place of Sigurd's fair hair and bright blue eyes, she
saw the dark locks and flashing black eyes of Gunnar.

"What man art thou?" she asked.

"Gunnar am I called," said Sigurd, "and through the flames have I
ridden to woo thee for my bride."

But she looked sadly at the floor and said: "Methought none but Sigurd
the Volsung could have dared those awful flames."

Then Sigurd thought to entice the maiden. "Much gold shall be thine,"
said he, "if thou wilt marry Gunnar the Niblung."

But she said: "Talk not to me of gold. All-Father Odin promised me a
hero-husband, and I, a warrior-maiden, will marry no silken knight for
gold."

Now Brunhild had bound herself by a solemn pledge to marry him who
should ride through the fire, so in the end she was obliged to submit
to her wooer's will; wherefore she took off the ring from Andvari's
hoard that Sigurd had placed upon her finger, and gave it to him, with
her promise to appear at the court of the Niblungs in ten days' time.
Sigurd gave her another ring in exchange, and then rejoined Gunnar,
with whom he rode back home, after having taken back his own form and
likeness.

And only to Gudrun, his wife, did Sigurd reveal the secret of how
Brunhild had been won for her brother Gunnar, and to her he gave the
ring from Andvari's hoard which she had returned to him.

Now, when ten days had passed by, Brunhild came to the land of the
Niblungs, and was met in solemn state by Gunnar at the door of his
palace. Then was held high festival at the marriage celebration, after
which Gunnar led his bride into the great hall where Sigurd and Gudrun
sat side by side upon the high dais. When Brunhild saw her old lover
she trembled violently and her face went ashy pale, then her beautiful
eyes met Sigurd's with a look of such intense sadness and meaning that
the spell was dissolved, and the remembrance of the love he had given
her rushed suddenly back into his mind, well-nigh overwhelming him
with grief.

Yet was he bound to Gudrun, as Brunhild was to Gunnar, so no more
passed at that time.

Now one day, when the birds sang pleasantly and all nature rejoiced in
the warmth of the summer sun, the two princesses, Gudrun and Brunhild,
went down to the river to bathe; and Gudrun waded the farther into the
water, saying scornfully that thus it became the wife to do whose
husband was the bravest in the world.

Then the bitter feelings which for long had vexed the soul of Brunhild
would not be restrained, and they poured forth in a torrent of wrath
like some mighty waters when the dam gives way before its constant
force.

Gudrun retorted upon her by telling how that it was Sigurd, not
Gunnar, who had braved the fiery flames, and in proof of this she
showed in triumph the ring from Andvari's hoard which she wore upon
her finger.

Now when she heard this, Brunhild was beside herself with rage that
she should have been thus tricked, and she went to her husband and
said: "Never again shalt thou see me glad in thy hall, nor hear me
speak words of peace and gladness within thy borders, for thou hast
deceived me, and art no hero as I thought."

And for many days after that Brunhild neither ate nor drank, but set
wide the doors of her bower and lamented, so that all folk heard and
marvelled.

In vain they tried to comfort her; she would not hear even the
soothing words of Sigurd, whom Gudrun had sent to her, saying
scornfully, however, as he went: "Give her red gold, forsooth, and
smother up her grief and anger therewith."

At length Brunhild sent for her husband, and bade him put Sigurd to
death, saying that she had vowed to marry the man who should come to
her through the fire, and, since this was now impossible, Sigurd must
surely die, that she might be released from her oath.

And at that Gunnar was sorely troubled, for he loved Sigurd very
dearly. But he said to himself: "Brunhild is better to me than all
things else, and the fairest of all women, and I will lay down my life
rather than lose her love."

So he sent for his brother and told him that he had made up his mind
to kill Sigurd. And Hoegni, his brother, was very loth, and declared
that such an act of treachery would bring great shame upon the land.
But Gunnar reminded him of the gold-hoard, and of how all would be
theirs if Sigurd were out of the way. And at length they determined to
incite their younger brother, Guttorm, to do the deed.

But Guttorm, in his turn, was unwilling until they mixed for him a
magic drink, which made him fierce and wild and eager for bloodshed,
so that he was ready for whatever might befall.

At midnight, therefore, Guttorm crept, sword in hand, to Sigurd's
chamber; but, as he bent over his pillow, he saw the bright blue eyes
of the young hero fixed steadily upon him; and he fled, for so keen
and eager were the eyes of Sigurd that few might look upon him. A
second time he went in, and again the same thing happened.

But the third time Sigurd lay asleep; then Guttorm took his sword and
drove it through his breast.

Wounded to death, the young man had just strength to raise himself,
seize his good sword and hurl it after Guttorm as he fled, and the
magic weapon cut him in two ere he reached the door. Then Sigurd fell
back into the arms of Gudrun and died.

Then did great grief fall upon the land of the Niblungs; and a mighty
funeral pyre was built for Sigurd, and his body was laid thereon.

Gudrun, his wife, sat silent and apart, her heart breaking for her
hero-husband; but Brunhild, when she saw what she had done, was filled
with grief and despair beyond endurance, and snatching a dagger from
her handmaidens, she stabbed herself and so died.

In such wise had the doom of the Magic Gold descended upon Regin and
Fafnir, and upon Sigurd and Brunhild. Nor was this the end of the
misery it was to work.

Loathing the thought of life in her brother's palace, Gudrun now fled
to the court of Alf, the foster-father of Sigurd, where for some years
she remained, busying herself in working a vast piece of tapestry on
which she embroidered the heroic deeds of Sigurd.

But after a time Atli, King of the Huns, the brother of Brunhild, sent
to Gunnar to demand that compensation should be made to him for his
sister's death; and to him Gunnar promised that, in satisfaction for
this, he should receive the hand of his sister Gudrun in marriage. So
the Niblung princes sent and fetched her from the court of Alf, and
forced her to marry Atli, much against her will.

Now at Atli's court her talk was ever of Sigurd and of the wondrous
gold-hoard he had brought to the Niblungs' land. And so it came to
pass that the greed of Atli was kindled when he heard of that
treasure, and he determined to make it his own.

So he sent a messenger to invite all the Niblung princes to visit his
court, intending, when he had them in his power, to put an end to
them. Now Gudrun guessed what was in Atli's mind, and therefore she
took off the gold ring from Andvari's hoard, and twined about it a
wolf's hair as a sign of warning; and this she sent by the same
messenger to her brothers.

But this messenger untwined the wolf's hair and gave only the ring to
Gunnar, who took it as a signal of good faith and gladly accepted the
invitation.

Hoegni alone was unwilling to accept the invitation, but when he found
that Gunnar would pay no heed to him, he prepared to go along with
him.

First, however, he persuaded his brother to take that great
treasure-hoard and to cast it into a deep hole at the bottom of a
mighty river, where none might find it save themselves.

So Gunnar agreed, and Hoegni took the gold, and, standing on a great
rock in the midst of the river, he flung it, with a huge splash, into
the water.

    "Down then and whirling outward the ruddy gold fell forth,
    As a flame in the dim grey morning flashed out a kingdom's worth;
    Then the waters roared above it, the wan water and the foam
    Flew up o'er the face of the rock-wall as the tinkling gold fell home,
    Unheard, unseen, forever, a wonder and a tale,
    Till the last of earthly singers from the sons of men shall fail."

Not yet, however, had the curse of that gold-hoard been entirely
fulfilled. For when the brave Niblungs reached the hall of Atli, they
found no welcome awaiting them, but sharp swords and hostile looks.
Fiercely they fought, but to no avail, and at length all were slain
save only Gunnar and Hoegni.

Then Atli had each brought before him in turn, fast bound as they
were, and promised to give freedom to him who would first reveal to
him the hiding-place of the gold-hoard. But they laughed in contempt,
even when they were put to the torture in his presence.

Then Hoegni, being weary of his life in chains, made an agreement with
Gunnar, so that when next King Atli asked the latter to tell him the
secret, he replied that he had made an oath not to reveal the
hiding-place while Hoegni lived, but that when he saw his brother was
dead, he would do all that Atli bade him. So they killed Hoegni, and
the Battle Maidens carried him away to the joys of Valhalla. But when
they showed proofs of his death to his brother, and bade him tell the
whereabouts of the hoard, Gunnar laughed a proud laugh and declared
that now the secret rested with him alone, and it should never be
revealed.

So, in his fury of disappointment, the king ordered him to be thrown,
with chained hands, into a den full of poisonous serpents; and his
harp was flung in after him. Then did Gunnar sit smiling in their
midst, and played with his toes upon the instrument until all the
creatures, save one, were fast asleep.

But this one serpent, whom men say was the witch-mother of Atli in
disguise, bit Gunnar in the side, and thus died the last of the
Niblungs.

Of that race Gudrun still remained, and she now planned a thing which
should avenge the blood of her kinsmen and end her own unhappy life.

So she took the sword of Sigurd, which Gunnar had given into her
hands, and slew Atli and placed him dead upon a ship. And when she had
cast it adrift, she flung herself into the sea; and so died.

Thus did Andvari's hoard fulfil the curse that had been set upon all
those who should be concerned with it. But the glittering treasure
itself lies hidden far beneath the waves of the mighty river Rhine,
and only the water-sprites know where it is hid.




CHAPTER XXI

The Boyhood of Frithiof the Bold

_This is the tale the Northmen tell of how Frithiof
the Bold asked for the hand of Ingeborg the Fair._


Once upon a time there lived in Norway a king named Bele, who had
three children. Helge and Halfdan were his sons, and his daughter was
called by the name of Ingeborg.

Now Ingeborg was the fairest of maidens, and had moreover such a fine
wit and understanding that all men said she was the first and best of
the good king's children.

To the west of the settlement in which King Bele lived rose up a great
white temple, hedged around with a lofty wall of wood. This temple was
sacred to Balder the Beautiful; and so much did men honour him in
those days of old, that they made strict laws that within the
enclosure in which his temple stood no man should hold converse with a
woman, nor should any harm be done to man or beast.

On the other side of the inlet on which stood the abode of Bele was a
village ruled by a mighty man of valour named Thorsten. This Thorsten
had a son called Frithiof, who at the time of his birth was bigger and
stronger than all other babes, and grew up not only tall but also bold
and brave of heart; so that men named him Frithiof the Bold.

Now Thorsten was a sea-rover. So he sent his little son to a sturdy
yeoman called Hilding, that he might be brought up by him and taught
all that a Viking ought to know. For the education of a Viking was no
small thing. He might not claim the title till he had lifted the
mighty stone that stood before the door of the king and had borne it
across the pathway. And he had to learn what was meant by the "triple
oath"--that he would not capture woman or child in battle, nor seek
refuge in a tempest, nor wait to bind up his wounds before the fight
was spent.

Now it so happened that, while the children of the king were still
young, their mother died, and the little princess was also placed in
the care of Hilding and his wife. Thus Frithiof and Ingeborg grew up
together, and were more beautiful and brave and clever than all the
other boys and girls of that place.

Thorsten, Frithiof's father, was the king's right hand, and now that
Bele was grown old and feeble he managed most of the affairs of the
kingdom. And Frithiof too was useful to the king, more so, indeed,
than were his own two sons.

Thorsten had a famous swift ship, called _Ellida_, which was rowed by
fifteen men on each side, and each oar required the strength of two
men to pull it; but Frithiof was so strong that he would row two oars
at once.

The king's two sons, Helge and Halfden, differed much from each other
in their appearance and characters, but they were alike in their
jealous dispositions. In particular they grudged Frithiof his growing
renown, and hated him in their hearts for his great strength, which
far exceeded theirs.

At length King Bele fell very sick, and, knowing that he was about to
die, he sent for Thorsten and their three sons and said:

"I know that this sickness will be to my death, and I have called you,
my children, to hear the last counsel of your father.

"My sons, govern the realm in peace, and let force stand sentinel at
the borders. The king is helpless who hath not the confidence and
affection of his people, and the throne is insecure if it rest not on
a foundation of just and equal laws.

"Choose not the forward for your counsellors, but confide, rather, in
the wisdom and valour of one tried friend. Thorsten and I have
faithfully kept friendship's troth in steadfast union, so do ye, in
weal or woe, wend together with Frithiof. If ye three will hold
together as one man, your match shall not be seen through all our
Northland.

"Let my last words be for my beloved Ingeborg. She hath grown lovely
in peace as the rose. Helge, be thou her guardian, and let no
storm-wind scatter those fair petals."

Then Thorsten, in his turn, addressed Frithiof:

"My son, I too must shortly wend to Valhalla, and I rejoice to think
that Odin has bestowed upon thee much strength and courage of heart.
It is good, but remember that strength without wit is soon brought to
naught, even as the bear, who wields in his paw the strength of twelve
men, is laid low by a thrust from the sword of one. Beware of
arrogance, which goes before a fall, and bend before the will of the
king's sons. Above all, will noble deeds and do thou every right."

After this the old men gave directions for their burial, and they
charged their sons to lay them beneath two barrows or mounds, one on
each side of the narrow firth, whose murmurs would ever be sweet music
as they slept, and across whose waves their spirits would hold
converse as of yore.

After the death of Thorsten, Frithiof took his land and ruled in his
stead, with the aid of his two foster-brothers, Bjoern and Osmund. And
he was now the owner of _Ellida_, the good ship which understood every
word that was spoken to her, as though she were alive; and of two
other heirlooms of priceless value. The first was a sword, Angurvadel
it was named, which tradition said had been forged in Eastern lands by
the dwarfs. Its hilt was of hammered gold, and the blade was covered
with magic runes, which in peace were dull, but which flamed blood-red
when the sword was brandished in war. The other was a marvellous
arm-ring, carved with all the wonders of the heavens.

It had always been the custom of the House of Thorsten to invite the
household of the king each year to a banquet, and so, soon after he
had succeeded to his father's place, Frithiof gave a feast more
magnificent than any that had been given hitherto. For he knew that,
with her two brothers, would come also Ingeborg the Fair, whom he
loved with his whole heart. And while the two young kings sat at the
board with hostile looks and downcast faces, this sweet princess
laughed among her maidens like a sunny day in June. Her hair was as
golden as the butter-cups in the spring meadows, her eyes were blue
like a summer sea, and her face fair as a hawthorn bush when it first
opens its buds of red and white.

But Frithiof was silent in her presence, for he had no words save "I
love thee" in his mind.

After this festival, the two kings turned home again in deeper wrath
than ever, for they saw how all men loved Frithiof and had him in
honour.

But after their departure, Frithiof grew silent and sad of
countenance, and when his foster-brother Bjoern questioned him as to
the cause he answered: "Sad am I because I love the Princess Ingeborg
with all my heart, and now would I ask for her in marriage. But I am
not of royal birth, and much I fear that my suit will be refused."

"Let us at least make trial," said practical Bjoern; and so, together
with a band of followers, they set off in the swift dragon-ship
_Ellida_ to the strand where, upon their father's burial mound, the
kings sat in judgment with their people.

Then Frithiof stood forth and in manly words made his request for the
hand of Ingeborg the Fair. But the kings said scornfully:

"Think not that we would give our sister to a peasant's son. She is
for a proud Northland chieftain, not for such as you, though all men
may boast of your wondrous deeds."

"Then," said Frithiof, in slow-gathering wrath, "my errand is soon
finished. Remember, that if this is your final answer, I will never
give you help in trouble, however much you may require it."

"Our kingdom requires not your service," they answered jeeringly, "we
can protect it ourselves. But if you need employment, why, we can give
you a servant's place among our household men."

Then Frithiof reared his great head, saying proudly:

"No man of yours am I, but, as my father was, I am a man for myself.
And now, were it not for the honour I bear to our fathers' graves,
your words would cost you dear. Hereafter come not within range of my
sword."

And as he spoke, with one blow he cleft the golden war shield of Helge
with his good sword, and the two halves fell clashing to the ground.




CHAPTER XXII

Frithiof and Ingeborg

_This is the tale the Northmen tell of how
Ingeborg went to dwell in Balder's grove._


Far in the south of that land lived a mighty ruler, whose name was
Ring. Wise was he, and king of a land like the groves of the gods,
where the corn crops waved each year and peace and justice flourished
within its borders. For thirty years had he ruled his kingdom, and
each year his people rose up and called him blessed.

Now one day this king sat deep in thought upon his golden chair, and
when he at length pushed it back from the board, his chieftains rose
up gladly to hear his words.

And the king said: "It is now a weary while since the queen, my wife,
left me sorrowful upon the earth and went to dwell in the bowers of
the blessed ones in Asgard. Never again shall I find a queen so good
and fair; but my children cry to me for a mother's care and I must
seek another wife for their sake.

"Now it comes to my remembrance that often King Bele visited my hall,
and with him sometimes came his fair daughter Ingeborg. 'Tis on her my
choice shall fall, for though I am old and she is but a young girl, I
know that she will be a good mother to my children."

"Take therefore gold and gems from yon oak presses, and let the
minstrels tune their harps and go forth to ask her in marriage from
the sons of Bele."

So a long line of harpers went forth, followed by youths in glad
array, and they stood before King Helge and King Halfdan, and gave to
them the message of King Ring.

Now Helge was nothing loth to give his fair sister to the king,
although he was an old man and she but a young girl; but, since he was
always very heedful of the will of the gods, he offered sacrifice and
carefully consulted the wise men and the wise women and all the omens
as to whether this thing should be. And all with one consent answered
that the marriage must not be allowed.

So Helge refused the king's request courteously enough, saying that
man must obey when the gods decree; but Halfdan, being rude and
waggish of tongue, said: "King Greybeard himself should have ridden
hither for his bride if he is not too old to mount his horse!"

Then the messenger returned wrathful, and King Ring said grimly: "They
shall soon see if King Greybeard be too old to take revenge," and with
that he struck his war shield, as it hung on the tree above him, such
a blow that the echo of it was borne even to the hall of Helge and
Halfdan. Then he sent messengers, this time in warlike array, to the
two kings, bidding them submit to his authority and pay him tribute.
"If ye refuse," said they, "our king will send a great army and take
the kingdom and utterly destroy you and your people."

But Helge and Halfdan answered with spirit:

"Not in our young days will we learn to do that which we will never
know when old, and that is how to do shameful service to a neighbour
king."

Then they summoned Hilding, their foster-father, and bade him go to
Frithiof and pray him to come with his followers to their aid. And
meantime, being in fear for their sister's safety, they sent her away
to the dim grove where Balder's temple rose grey among the shadows.
There, day by day, fair Ingeborg sat among her maidens at her
embroidery, and as she drew the thread it was wet with her tears.

Now when Hilding, that good old yeoman, reached the hall of Frithiof,
he found the hero sitting with Bjoern at a game of chess. Gladly was he
greeted by the young man, who pointed to the High Chair, the chief
seat at the board, and bade him sit and drink a horn of mead while
they finished their game.

But Hilding, full of his errand, began at once to speak: "I am sent by
the sons of Bele," said he. "They now salute thee and pray that thou
wouldst go up to their help to battle against King Ring, who is about
to attack their land with violence."

But Frithiof seemingly paid no heed to his words, saying only to his
opponent: "Bjoern, thy king is in danger, beware! Yet a pawn can
recover him even now."

Then Hilding urged: "Frithiof, my son, anger not the kings. Remember
that they too have power, and that they threaten thee with a terrible
fate if thou wilt not go forth to their aid."

But Frithiof only said to Bjoern:

"See how thou threatenest my castle in vain!"

    "Grim and high the fierce wall rises,
    Bright the Shield-tower shines within."

Then Hilding tried another argument.

"Son!" he cried, "knowest thou not how Ingeborg weeps all day within
the Place of Balder? Wilt thou not fight for her release? Wilt thou
leave her blue eyes to melt in vain?"

But Frithiof answered Bjoern, as though unheeding: "Bjoern, 'tis in vain
thou tryest to take my queen, ever so dear and true to me. She is my
favourite piece in all the game, and, come what will, I'll save my
queen."

"What!" cried the old man. "Must I go forth unheeded, without even a
reply, because of this child's game?"

Then Frithiof rose and pressed his hand kindly, saying: "Father,
naught will make me change my mind, and what thou hast heard me say
here in this place, thou mayest tell again to those who sent thee."

When the kings received the report of Hilding concerning Frithiof,
they waited but to see that their sister Ingeborg was safe within the
walls of Balder's grove, and then prepared to march with all the
forces they could muster to meet King Ring.

Meantime Frithiof attired himself in his richest dress, and placed his
golden ring upon his arm, and called on Bjoern and his servants to
follow him.

"Whither now do we go, my brother?" asked Bjoern.

"To the grove of Balder," answered Frithiof shortly.

"That is not well," said Bjoern anxiously. "It will draw down the anger
of the gods upon us."

"That remains to be seen," replied Frithiof.

So they rowed over the firth and entered Balder's grove, and made
their way into Ingeborg's bower.

Now when she saw Frithiof, the blue eyes of Ingeborg flashed with joy,
but she said gravely, as she rose to receive him: "Now wherefore art
thou so bold, Frithiof, to come hither against the will of my brothers
and to bring the wrath of the gods upon us?"

But Frithiof replied: "Nay, love, no perils attend us. Fear not the
wrath of Balder; that gentle god will not punish true lovers. Let us
kneel at his shrine. No incense is more grateful to his soul than the
faith of two young hearts vowing eternal love."

So when they had knelt for a space they sat down side by side, and
Frithiof drew the ring from off his arm and gave it to Ingeborg,
saying: "This ring will I give thee if thou wilt promise never to part
with it, but to send it to me when thou no longer hast need of it. And
with it I plight thee my troth."

And in the same manner did Ingeborg give her own ring to Frithiof.

And then Ingeborg with fond entreaties implored her lover to seek
Helge once again, and offer his hand, lest haply he might be
reconciled. Long did Frithiof hesitate, but at last the melting eyes
of Ingeborg could be denied no longer, and he promised that once again
would he seek the kings in peace and friendship.




CHAPTER XXIII

Frithiof Braves the Storm

_This is the tale the Northmen tell of how Frithiof
the Bold went on a perilous adventure._


Now when the two young kings met with Ring, and found that his forces
were far stronger than theirs, their hearts failed them and they sent
messengers to sue for peace. And it was arranged that they should
submit to King Ring, and should give Ingeborg their sister to him in
marriage, together with the third part of all their possession.

Now one morning tidings were brought to Frithiof by Bjoern, who cried:
"The kings are returned home, and short enough will be our time of
peace, for we have broken the law of Balder, and we shall have to
pay."

But Frithiof, who knew no fear, bade him be at rest, saying that
directly the kings had taken their seat upon their father's
grave-mound, to hear the suits brought before them, he intended once
again to claim the hand of Ingeborg.

So on the day appointed he sought the place where Helge sat, black as
a thunder-cloud, with his warriors around him, and foolish Halfdan,
jesting as usual, and playing with his sword, stood by his side. And
Frithiof stood forth and said: "Not yet is thy kingdom free, O Helge,
from the threat of battle. Give me then thy sister and my strong right
arm shall fight for thee. Come, let this grudge between us be
forgotten, for I am loth to bear myself ill towards the brother of
Ingeborg and the sons of Bele. Here is my hand; but by the gods I
swear that, if thou refuse, it shall never be stretched forth to thee
in peace again."

At these words a shout broke from the listening throng and the air was
rent with the noise of clashing weapons.

"Ay! Give him Ingeborg, for what swordsman in our land is like to
him?"

And even foolish Halfdan joined in the prayer.

But Helge, still cold and hard, made reply:

"The peasant's son might indeed have claimed the Princess Ingeborg,
but not he who has broken Balder's peace. Say, Frithiof, hast thou
not spurned the law of Balder's house and spoken to my sister within
his sacred walls?"

Then from the crowd of warriors came the murmur: "Say but nay, say
nay! The word of Thorsten's son is good as any king's. Say nay! Say
nay!"

But Frithiof made reply: "I will not lie to gain the joys of Asgard. I
have seen thy sister and spoken to her within yon walls, yet have I
not disturbed Balder nor broken his good peace."

Then all that assembly was filled with horror as they heard his words,
for they all feared the wrath of the god. Hoarse and gloomy was the
voice of Helge as he said:

"Now, by my great father's laws, I could condemn thee to banishment or
death, but, even as great Balder was mild, so shall my judgment be.

"Far away on the isles of the west dwells a mighty jarl named
Angantyr, who in my father's days paid yearly tribute to our land, and
since his death has kept all back. Away then to his realm, collect the
money, and bring it back to us. 'Tis said he is hard-handed, and will
meet with the sharp sword him who asks for his gold, but what is that
to thee? Hence, Frithiof, or be branded coward for evermore."

Then Frithiof bowed his head and departed, for he knew that it was the
will of Balder that this thing should be.

But first he went again to visit his betrothed and to bid her a sad
farewell. Heavy of heart was Ingeborg, for she knew that her brother
had planned an expedition that should cost Frithiof his life; but
Frithiof cheered her, reminding her that this Angantyr, whom men so
dreaded, was his father's oldest friend.

So Frithiof prepared to set out on his journey, but first he made a
pact with Helge that his possessions should rest in peace during his
absence, and the promise was confirmed with oaths.

Then Frithiof set out with eighteen of his companions, and they went
on board the swift ship _Ellida_ and sailed out beyond the bay.

But no sooner had he departed than the kings plundered and burnt his
village. After this, they sent two witches, and bade them send such a
terrible tempest against Frithiof and his followers that they should
all perish in the sea. To this the evil hags readily agreed, and,
having climbed to the top of a high mountain, began to cast their
wicked spells upon the winds.

Thus it came to pass that when Frithiof and his men had left the land
far behind them there arose a great storm, and a mighty wind, which
lashed the waves to the very stars and drove the ship violently along.

But Frithiof only smiled and sang:

    "Run, good ship, before the wind,
    Ingeborg thou soon shalt find.
    Ingeborg, the maid I love,
    Waits for me in Balder's grove."

Then said Bjoern, in fear and wrath: "Well would it be if thou hadst
something better to do than to sing of Balder's grove."

But Frithiof laughed aloud, and showed him how the north wind was
blowing them straight to the Solundar Isles, where they might find
safe harbour. They did not bide there long, however, for the weather
suddenly became calmer, and for awhile they sailed along before a
favourable breeze. Then the wind began to freshen again, and when they
were far out at sea a still mightier tempest arose, with so much sleet
and snow that they could not see the prow of the vessel from the
stern. The waves also beat over the ship, so that they had to bale
incessantly. But Frithiof, though he toiled harder than them all,
continued to laugh and sing, though Bjoern growled: "He who wanders far
meets many a hindrance."

Then a great sea swept over the boat and nearly swamped her; and
Frithiof cried: "See how the Swan Maidens are pledging us!" and set to
work to bale with a good heart.

Still higher rose the storm, till the waves, like snow mountains,
reared themselves above the ship; and Bjoern cried in despair: "Sure
woe is now at hand, my foster-brother. Why didst thou ever enter the
bower of Balder's grove?"

But Frithiof said with a laugh: "Methinks some of our good fellows
will have to journey to the realms of Ran, the Sea-goddess, and we
shall cut but a sorry figure there unless we go with a brave face and
red gold in our hands."

So saying he took the gold ring that Ingeborg had given him and cut it
in pieces and divided it among his men.

At last the storm grew still and the waves calm; but the ship was
water-logged, and Frithiof called loudly on the men to bale her out.

"It is useless to try to do it," said the faint-hearted Bjoern, but
Frithiof cried: "Come, brother, never despair, for it hath ever been a
hero's custom to give what help he can as long as possible, come what
may hereafter."

So they baled _Ellida_ clear, and, seeing his companions were now worn
out with toil, Frithiof bade them lie down in the boat and rest. And
he himself took two oars at the prow and rowed onwards with his mighty
strength till they came to land; and finding that his followers were
still weak and weary he carried them over the surf on his shoulders
and set them safely on shore.

Now the island on which they had landed was part of the domain of that
Jarl Angantyr, and soon a message him:

"Tidings, my jarl. Men have come ashore, but they seem weary and
helpless enough. Yet one of them is so strong and fresh that he
carries all the others to land."

"Surely," said the jarl, "that man must be Frithiof, son of my old
friend Thorsten, a man renowned for all good deeds."

Then Angantyr sent messengers to bid Frithiof welcome and to bring him
to his hall. And he prevailed upon his guest to pass the winter with
him, and showed high hospitality to him and to all his men. But when
Frithiof spoke of the errand on which he had come, the jarl said
proudly: "No tribute shall King Helge have of me, but thou, my friend,
shall take back such treasure as thou wilt, and tribute thou mayest
call it, or any other name, as thou desirest. For now it is clear to
me that Helge hath laid a trap for thee, and such kings are but
ill-esteemed in this land."




CHAPTER XXIV

Balder Forgives

_This is the tale the Northmen tell of how Frithiof
the Bold was wedded to Ingeborg the Fair._


Now while Frithiof was absent in the Western Isles there came Ring,
that good old chieftain, northward to the land of the two young
rulers, Helge and Halfdan.

Sorely grieved was Ingeborg when she knew that she must wed the
stranger king, but she knew naught of what had happened to Frithiof,
and was obliged to obey her brothers' will.

And as they sat at the marriage feast, Ring saw the bracelet upon her
arm and knew that it had been Frithiof's; and he bade her take it off
and give it to the wife of Helge that she might give it to the
wanderer on his return.

In the following spring came Frithiof back again to Norway, having
parted from Angantyr with much love and goodwill. But as he neared his
home, one met him whom he knew, who said: "Black have grown the
buildings here, and traces there are none of the hands of friends."

Then Frithiof held counsel with his men and they shaped their course
to the hall of the kings. But upon arrival there he heard that they
were away at Balder's grove offering a sacrifice. So he set off
thither with Bjoern, leaving the rest with orders to make holes in all
the ships, both large and small, that lay in that harbour. When they
came to the entrance of the temple, Frithiof bade Bjoern stay outside
and, entering alone, stood silent in the shadows watching where King
Helge stood, crowned, by the altar of fire, whose flickering flames
painted the great wooden image of Balder with a golden glory. Around
the walls were ranged the ancient priests, silver-bearded, some with
burning brands and others with flint knives for the sacrifice.

Up to King Helge then strode Frithiof and, taking from his girdle the
bag of silver which he had received from Angantyr, he flung it in the
face of the king, saying: "Receive thy tribute thus!" And so hard did
he fling the money that it struck out two of Helge's teeth, and he
fell senseless on the floor.

Now there were few but old men in the temple hall, and they were awed
by the sight of Frithiof's gleaming blade.

So for a time he stood unmolested, but as he turned to go the arm-ring
he had given to Ingeborg caught his eye, for it had been placed upon
Balder's arm. "Pardon, O Balder," he said, "but thou wilt no claim a
stolen jewel!" As he spoke he tugged at the ring, but it seemed to
have grown fast to the wooden arm. Frithiof put forth all his
strength, and suddenly the ring came away, but the great figure of the
god fell prone across the altar, whose flames immediately enveloped
it and leapt up as though in triumph to the rafters of the hall.

Then was there great confusion as the flames spread rapidly. Frithiof
stayed to render what aid was possible, but when it was seen that the
temple was doomed to utter destruction he turned grief-stricken away,
and rejoining his companions they put out to sea.

When King Helge came to his senses again his first thought was
vengeance, and he summoned his men to pursue after Frithiof. But his
ships had barely got under way when they began to sink, so that they
had to put back quickly into harbour. Then in his fury did Helge
snatch his bow to shoot an arrow after Frithiof, but so strongly did
he pull it that the string broke and the bow fell useless from his
hand.

Meantime, Frithiof sailed merrily out to sea; and when Bjoern
questioned him as to what he meant to do next he replied: "Since I may
no longer stay in Norway, I will learn the customs of the sea-chief,
and will rove as a Viking."

So all through the summer they sailed to distant islands and far-off
countries, winning both goods and renown, until he had become
exceeding rich and famous. Wicked and cruel men he slew, but peasants
and merchants and women he let go free, like the good Viking that he
was.

At length, after four years had thus passed away, Frithiof said to
Bjoern: "Weary am I of these expeditions, and therefore will I sail
away to Uplands and hold discourse with good King Ring."

"It is not good," said Bjoern, "to trust thyself in a rival's power. If
thou must do this rash thing at least go not alone."

"I am never alone," replied the hero, "while my sword hangs at my
side."

Frithiof now made preparation for his journey, and when he said
farewell to his companions he was clad in a cloak of skin which
completely covered him, and he walked with two staves as one who is
bowed down with years. His face, too, was covered with a great beard.

It was eventide when he entered the king's hall and stood far down by
the door with his cloak drawn over his face.

Then the king said to the queen as she sat by him at table: "There has
just come a man into the hall taller by far than other men."

And she answered without interest that that was no great news.

Then the king sent for the stranger and questioned him as to whence he
came; and because he loved to show hospitality he bade him seat
himself at his side. "But," said he, "let fall that shaggy hide, which
covers, as I think, a proper man."

Then Frithiof showed himself in a dark-blue kirtle, with the ring
gleaming on his arm and his sword girt to a broad silver belt, from
which hung a well-filled purse. And when the queen saw that arm-ring
she knew Frithiof, in spite of the great beard that he had grown; but
she betrayed her recognition only by her changing colour and the
heaving of her breast.

Now the king soon grew to love Frithiof, whom he compelled to stay
with him all the winter through. Little and seldom spoke the queen to
him, but by the king he was ever regarded with a glad and smiling
countenance.

Then it came to pass that one day Frithiof had accompanied them to a
banquet, and their way lay over a lake. And Frithiof warned the king
that the ice on this lake was not safe. Scarcely had the king thanked
him for his care when the ice broke, and the sledge with the royal
pair upon it must have been submerged had not Frithiof dragged it
forth and saved their lives. Then said the king, looking at him very
kindly: "Well done, good friend, Frithiof the Bold could not have done
better had he been here."

The winter passed away, and one day, when the woods were full of green
leaves, the king went forth into them with Frithiof as his only
companion. Presently said the king: "Heavy am I with sleep, and here
must I rest."

But Frithiof said: "Not so; let my lord journey home, for here is
danger to those who sleep in the open air."

"I care not," said the king, and so laid himself down to sleep.

And as he slept Frithiof came and looked on him, and then quickly took
his sword from its scabbard and flung it away.

Then the king opened his eyes and said: "Well hast thou resisted that
temptation, Frithiof; for Frithiof I knew thee to be when first thou
camest into my hall. Now stay with me, for my heart yearns towards
thee and I am far stricken in years, and if thou wilt be my right hand
for the days that are left, thou shalt have my land after my death for
thine own."

But Frithiof shook his head sadly, saying: "not so, O king, for even
now must I journey away from these shores."

Shortly after this Frithiof prepared to depart, and his dragon-ship
lay at her moorings tugging as though eager to breast the waves of
ocean once again. Then came he to Ring and Ingeborg, but the old king
was at the point of death. "Valhalla calls to me," said he, "and my
weary spirit would fain be at rest. Frithiof, take thou my kingdom and
guard the crown." He then placed the hand of his queen in that of
Frithiof, and a moment later his spirit was borne by the Valkyrs into
the Regions of the Blessed.

So they raised a mighty cairn above King Ring, and great was the
mourning and lamentation in the land. Then all men looked to Frithiof
as his successor, but he bade them give their allegiance to the son of
King Ring, who was a right noble boy, and when they looked upon him
they saw that he was worthy to wear his father's crown.

But because the people loved Frithiof, they cried: "Govern thou the
realm while our king is young, and let us celebrate thy marriage with
Ingeborg, as King Ring desired."

But Frithiof answered sadly: "I must fare over the seas to Balder's
sacred grove. The mild god's wrath still burns against me. He took, he
only can restore, my cherished bride."

The farewells have been spoken, the swift ship has cleaved the waves,
and the hero stands in the desolate grove where once stood the temple
of Balder, but where wild animals are now in hiding.

"Mild, blue-eyed Balder," speaks the hero, "will no atonement quit me
of my guilt? Blood-fines take we for kinsmen slain, and the high gods
are not wont to nurse their wrath when altar flames consume the
sacrifice. Some offering ask, all that thou wilt is thine."

    "Then sudden, o'er the western waters pendent,
    An Image comes, with gold and flames resplendent,
    O'er Balder's grove it hovers, night's clouds under,
    Like gold crown resting on a bed of green.
    At last to a temple settling, firm 'tis grounded--
    Where Balder stood, another temple's founded."

Frithiof gazed in wonderment, and his heart went out in praise for the
sign vouchsafed. He would raise a shrine more glorious than the one
which had been destroyed by fire, and thus would he be at rest.

Now, while the timbers were being hewn and the carved pillars were
taking shape, King Helge was absent upon a foray amongst the Finnish
mountains. One day his band passed by a crag where stood the lonely
shrine of some forgotten god, and King Helge scaled the rocky summit
with intent to raze the ruined walls. The lock held fast and, as Helge
tugged fiercely at the mouldered gate, suddenly a sculptured image of
the deity, rudely summoned from his ancient sleep, started from his
niche above.

Rudely he fell upon the head of the intruder, and Helge stretched his
length upon the rocky floor, nor stirred again.

And now Balder's temple is finished, and its noble proportions look
over the firth, in whose clear waters it is reflected. Its vast hall
is filled melody, and the Chief Priest of Balder stands ready to
receive a bride. But who stands frowning upon the threshold? King
Halfdan it is, who approaches, sword in hand.

Frithiof with quick hands unbuckled the sword from his thigh and
leaned it, with his golden shield, against the altar. Then with
outstretched hand he advanced saying:

    "Most noble in this strife will he be found
    Who first is right hand good
    Offers in pledge of peaceful brotherhood."

Halfdan, blushing deeply, hastened to doff his iron gauntlet, and the
two men, severed so long, forgot their enmity and pledged abiding
faith with friendly grasp.

    "And as the last deep accents
    Of reconcilement sounded,
    Lo! Ingeborg sudden enters, rich adorn'd,
      And to her brother's heart she trembling sinketh.
    He with his sister's fears
      Deep-moved, her hand all tenderly in Frithiof's linketh,
    His burden soft transferring to the Hero's breast."




CHAPTER XXV

How the End of All Things Came About

_This is the tale the Northmen tell of how
the End of All Things Came About._


When the Asa folk had banished wicked Loki to earth, and bound him
fast in his gloomy cavern, they thought they had heard and seen the
last of his evil ways.

But this was not to be the case. Finding he could not free himself,
but must endure his bonds till the end of All Things, Loki tried to
divert himself by enticing the earth people to him and teaching them
to do every manner of evil. And so fast did knowledge of this evil
spread, that the whole world soon became full of wickedness. Brothers
fought and killed each other, men were for ever at war with other men,
no one had time or room in his heart for pity or for kindliness.

Sol and Mani, who were wont to drive radiant through the sky in their
golden chariots, grew pale with dismay, for they knew that these
things portended their end, when those hungry wolves, who were ever
pursuing them, would overtake and devour them utterly.

And they ceased to smile upon the land, wherefore the earth grew cold
and dark, and a long, long winter began. From North, South, East, and
West great snowstorms blew over the world, the Frost Giants waved
their great wings and breathed an icy blast, and a thick layer of ice
spread over the whole surface of the earth.

For six seasons this terrible winter held the world in its grip, and
during all that time the earth people grew more wicked, until all
traces of goodness disappeared. Meantime, deep down in the dark shades
of the Ironwood, an evil Frost Giantess fed the pursuing wolves, so
that they gained strength each day, and at length they were able to
overtake Sol and Mani in their head-long course, and to devour them.

Now when that dreadful thing had happened, the whole earth shook to
its foundations, and Loki, the Fenris Wolf, and the Sea-serpent,
making one last tremendous effort, broke their bonds and rushed to
wreak revenge upon their captors.

At that moment the dragon that lies at the root of the Tree of Life
gnawed it through, so that it quivered and shook to its very top. The
red cock who stood perched above the halls of Valhalla gave a shrill
crow of alarm, and this was taken up by the white cock who roosts upon
the tallest tree on the earth, and echoed by Hela's blood-red bird in
the depths of the Mist Home.

Heimdall knew the meaning of these sounds, and putting the horn to his
lips he gave the last long call from Asgard, which resounded across
the Rainbow Bridge throughout the whole world.

Then the Asa folk sprang from their flower-strewn couches, and seizing
their weapons, they mounted their battle steeds and rode across the
Rainbow Bridge to the great plain where they were to wage their last
fight.

Meantime, the Sea-serpent was lashing the waters of the ocean with his
tail as he made his way through the blood-red waves to that dread
battlefield. And Loki, who had roused all the host of the Fire Giants,
was sailing thither as fast as the tossing ocean would carry his fatal
barque; while from the foggy regions of the north issued the whole
race of Frost Giants, eager for their revenge upon the hated Asa folk.

From a cleft in the earth came also Hela, the goddess of the
underworld, followed by her gaunt watchdog and by all the evil dregs
of her gloomy realm. Lastly, from a blinding flash of lightning that
seemed to rend the skies in twain, came forth the troop of Flame
Giants, each with his fiery sword in hand.

Loki gladly placed himself at the head of all those hosts, and he led
them forward boldly against the gods.

And first they thought to storm Asgard in one wild onset, but the
Rainbow Bridge sank with a mighty crash under their horses' feet.

Meanwhile, the Asas had been gathering their forces upon the
battlefield, where with calm, stern faces they awaited the attack of
their foes--the red Flame Giants, the grim army of Hela, the
grey-white host of the Frost Giants, led by Loki, with the Fenris Wolf
on one hand and the Sea-serpent, breathing out clouds of deadly
vapour, on the other.

    "And all are marshalled in one flaming square
    Against the gods, upon the plains of heaven."

Then came the crash of battle, in which, for all their courage, the
Asas were bound to meet with defeat. Desperately they fought, but all
to no avail, for, at the moment that Heimdall and Loki fell dead
before each other's swords, and Thor, after killing the Sea-serpent,
was drowned in the poisonous stream that flowed from the creature's
mouth, the Fenris Wolf came at All-Father Odin with jaws open so wide
that they reached from earth to heaven; and rushing upon the mighty
Asa he engulfed him in that horrid tomb.

Most of the Asas, as well as their foes, now lay dead on the
battlefield, and, seeing this, the Flame Giants suddenly grasped their
fiery brands and flung them over earth and heaven and all the
underworld.

The mighty Tree of Life withered and fell; the golden halls of Asgard
melted away; the green things of earth turned black, and still the
fire raged, until the whole world, burnt to a cinder, sank beneath the
waves of the sea.

Thus did the End of All Things come about.

But because the End of All Things is also very often the Beginning of
Others, the Northmen say that, after many long years, the old Earth
rose again, clean and pure and bright from her long cleansing
underneath the sea. And in the sky above a daughter of Sol again drove
her sun-chariot, and smiled upon the earth, so that it grew young and
fresh and green again.

And when this came to pass, a man and a woman, who, sunk in sleep in
the depths of a forest, had escaped the universal destruction, came
forth and took possession of the sweet green lands, for themselves and
for their children for ever.

    "So perish the old Gods!
    But out of the sea of Time
    Rises a new land of song.
    Fairer than the old.
    Over is meadows green
    Walk the young bards and sing.

    Build it again,
    O ye bards,
    Fairer than before!
    Ye fathers of the new race,
    Feed upon morning dew,
    Sing the new Song of Love!

    The law of force is dead!
    The law of love prevails!
    Thor, the thunderer,
    Shall rule the earth no more,
    No more, with threats,
    Challenge the meek Christ.

    Sing no more,
    O ye bards of the North,
    Of Vikings and of Jarls!
    Of the days of Eld
    Preserve the freedom only,
    Not the deeds of blood."

                      LONGFELLOW.




PRONOUNCING INDEX OF PROPER NAMES

(_a as in hate; e as in tea; o as in note; ae as in arm; e
as in merit_)

Transcriber's Note: [=oo] represents two 'o's with a line on top. There
is no Unicode representation for the letter.

These letters can be represented only in Unicode. Correct letters are
provided in the Unicode text.


AEgir (a'jir)

Agnar (ag'nar)

Andvari (aend'vae-re)

Angantyr (aen-gaen'ter)

Angurvadel (aen-gur-vae'del)

Angur-boda (aen-gur-bo'da)

Asa (a'sa)

Asgard (as'gaerd)

Ask (aesk)

Atli (at'le)


Balder (baul'der)

Baugi (bow'ge)

Bele (be-la')

Bjoern (byern)

Bragi (brae'ge)

Branstock (bran'stok)

Bredi (bre'de)

Brock (brock)

Brunhild (br[=oo]n'hild)


Draupnir (drowp'nir)


Elli (el'le)

Ellida (el-li'da)

Embla (em'bla)


Fafnir (faf'nir)

Fenga (fenga)

Fenris (fen'ris)

Fensalir (fen'sael-ir)

Fialar (fyael'ar)

Fiorgyn (fyor'gen)

Frey (fri)

Freya (fri'a)

Frigga (frig'a)

Frithiof (frit'yof)


Galar (gael'ar)

Geirrod (gir'rod)

Geri (ger'e)

Gersemi (ger'se-me)

Gialp (gyaelp)

Gilling (gil'ling)

Gioell (gyel)

Giuki (gi'[=oo]ki)

Gnomes (nomz)

Greip (grip)

Greyfell (gra-fel)

Grid (gred)

Grimnir (grim'nir)

Grimhild (grim'hild)

Gudrun (goo'droon)

Gungnir (goong'nir)

Gunlod (goon'lod)

Gunnar (gun'naer)

Guttorm (goot'torm)


Hamdir (ham'dir)

Halfdan (half'dan)

Heidrun (hi'dr[=oo]n)

Heimdall (him'dael)

Hela (hela)

Helge (hel'ge)

Hermod (her'mod)

Hindfell (hind'fel)

Hiordis (hyor'dis)

Hoder (ho'der)

Hoenir (he'nir)

Hoegni (heg'ne)

Hreidmar (hrid'mar)

Hugi (hu'gi)

Hugin (hu'gin)

Hunding (hunding)

Hyrroken (her'ro-kin)


Idun (e'doon)

Ingeborg (in'ge-borg)


Jarl (yaerl)


Kari (kaer'e)

Kvasir (kvae'sir)


Logi (lo'ge)

Loki (lo'ke)

Lygni (leg'ni)


Mani (mae'ne)

Midgard (mid'gaerd)

Mimir (me'mir)

Mioelnir (myel'nir)

Modir (mo'dir)

Munin (mu'nin)


Niblungs (ne'bloongz)

Niffelheim (nifl'him)

Nioerd (nyerd)


Odin (o'din)

Odur (o'door)


Ragnarok (rag'na-ruk)

Ran (raen)

Ratatosk (rae'ta-tusk)

Rati (rae'te)

Regin (ra'gin)

Rerir (ra'rir)

Ring (ring)

Ringhorn (ring'horn)

Roskva (ros'kva)


Sif (sif)

Siggeir (sig'ir)

Sigi (sig'e)

Sigmund (sig'moond)

Signy (sig'ni)

Sigurd (se'goord)

Sigyn (se'gen)

Sindri (sin'dre)

Sinfiotli (sin-fe-ot'li)

Skadi (skae'de)

Skrymir (skrim'ir)

Sleipnir (slip'nir)

Sol (sol)

Suttung (soot't[=oo]ng)

Svadilfare (svae'dil-faer'e)


Thialfi (te'aelf'e)

Thiassi (te-aes-se)

Thok (tok)

Thor (thor or tor)

Thorsten (tor-sten)

Thrym (trim)

Tyr (ter)


Uplands (up'lands)


Valhalla (vael-hael'la)

Vali (vael'e)

Valkyrs (val'kirz)

Valtam (vael'tam)

Vikings (vik'ingz)

Volsung (vol'soong)


Ymir (e'mir)

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Told by the Northmen:, by
E. M. [Ethel Mary] Wilmot-Buxton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TOLD BY THE NORTHMEN: ***

***** This file should be named 29551.txt or 29551.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/5/5/29551/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Suzanne Shell, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
