The Project Gutenberg EBook of Funny Little Socks, by Sarah. L. Barrow

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Funny Little Socks
       Being the Fourth Book

Author: Sarah. L. Barrow

Release Date: August 3, 2009 [EBook #29595]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FUNNY LITTLE SOCKS ***




Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)








[Illustration: THE CHILDREN GIVING GAWOW A DANCE.]




THE SOCK STORIES,

BY "AUNT FANNY'S" DAUGHTER.


FUNNY LITTLE SOCKS:

BEING

THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE SERIES.

BY

"AUNT FANNY'S" DAUGHTER,

THE AUTHOR OF "THE LITTLE WHITE ANGEL."

          NEW YORK:
          LEAVITT & ALLEN, 21 & 23 MERCER ST.
          1863.




  ENTERED, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1862, by
  S. L. BARROW,
  In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the United States
      for the
  Southern District of New York.


          JOHN T. TROW,
          PRINTER, STEREOTYPER AND ELECTROTYPER,
          60 Greene Street, New York.




          TO

          DARLING LITTLE

          ALLIE BABY,

          These Funny Little Socks

          ARE AFFECTIONATELY

          DEDICATED.




CONTENTS OF VOL. IV.


                                     PAGE
          LITTLE MOTHER,                7
          DOLLS AT HOUSEKEEPING,       40
          THE FAIRY WISH,             102




LITTLE MOTHER.


ONE day Kitty's mother called her little daughter to her, and taking
both her dimpled dots of hands in her own soft white ones, said, "Kitty,
my darling, I am going to New York this morning, to see your dear
grandma', and I shall have to leave the house in your charge until I
come back. Do you think you can be my little housekeeper for to-day?"

"Oh yes, mamma! I should like that so much! I will keep house as well as
you--that is, 'most, not quite!" and Kitty jumped up and down for joy
at being trusted with such important affairs.

"You must take care of dear little Luly and Walter, you know; see that
they have their dinners fixed right, and go out walking with them and
nurse; and if any company comes, you must go down and see them, and say
that mamma has gone to New York, will you?"

"Yes, mamma; I will be just as good as pie!" said Kitty, earnestly;
"Luly and Wawa will like to have me for a mother, I guess."

"Yes; you are their Little Mother for to-day," said her mamma. "I know
you love me, Kitty, and want to save me all the trouble you can; it
will be a great comfort to me, while I am away, to feel that I can trust
you perfectly;" and she kissed the little, rosy cheek, I'm sure I can't
tell how many times, and Kitty felt so proud and happy that she only
wished she had been trusted with a much larger family of little brothers
and sisters, instead of two; that she might show the more what an
excellent Little Mother she intended to be. You would wish so too,
wouldn't you! yes, of course!

Kitty May lived with her papa and mamma, Luly and Walter, Mary the
nurse, and Betty the cook, three brown horses, two red cows, a black
dog, and a white kitten, at a beautiful country seat up the Hudson
River. She was only eight years old, but her obedience to her parents,
and tender, loving care of her little brother and sister, were beautiful
to see, and a shining example to some little girls I know. On the day
that I am telling you about, her papa had gone to town, as usual, early
in the morning, and now here was mamma going too, and Kitty would be
left to play lady of the house as grand as anything.

Well, the carriage was brought to the door, and mamma got in, after
kissing her little family all round about twenty times. Everybody rushed
to the front piazza to bid her good-by in their own fashion. Trip, the
black dog, jumped and barked around the horses, until they nearly kicked
him, when he sprang away, snapping out, "No, you don't! no, you don't!"
Dody, the white kitten, so called by Walter for "Daisy," mewed as hard
as she could from Luly's arms. Walter crowed and chuckled, and said,
"Boo-bi!" meaning good-by; Luly lisped, "Dood-by, dear mamma, _div_ my
_yove_ to gan'ma;" and Kitty said, "Good-by, mamma; I'll be a famous
Little Mother--see if I'm not!" And so the carriage drove away.

When it was quite out of sight, the little girls skipped and climbed,
and wee Walter was carried by nurse up stairs into the nursery; and
Kitty said, "Now, Mary, you can just go on with your sewing; you needn't
mind us a bit. I'm going to take care of _the children_; mamma said
so."

"Very well, Miss Kitty," said Mary; "I'll sit in the window here, and if
you want me, you can call."

So Mary fixed little Walter in his chair, and Luly got hers, and Kitty
sat down in her mamma's rocking chair, to be grander.

Walter's chair had a little tray fastened before it, on which his toys
were put. His dearest plaything was a ridiculous old doll, with no eyes,
half a wig, such a dilapidated pair of kid arms that the stuffing came
bursting through in every direction, making her look as if she had a
cotton plantation inside her, and the bolls were sprouting out; and such
an extremely short pair of legs in proportion to her body, that it
seemed as if they must shut into her like a pair of telescopes. Besides
this, there was a stale sugar peacock without a tail, a monkey that ran
up and down a stick, and a woolly dog that could open his mouth and bark
when you pressed him underneath; but the doll was the prime favorite,
after all. Walter called her Gawow, and as nobody in the house could
imagine what he meant by it, it was supposed to be a pure piece of
invention, and a very fine sort of thing.

The children played on peaceably together for some time, when all at
once there came a ring at the bell.

"Dear me!" cried Kitty, springing up and smoothing down her little
black silk apron in a great flurry. "There comes company, and I'm to go
and see them."

"Ou!" said Luly; "me want to see tompany too!"

"And so you shall, you little darling!" said Kitty, kissing her; and,
sure enough, up came Ellen, the waiter, to say that the good minister,
Mr. Lacy, was down stairs; for Mrs. May had smilingly told her, before
she went, that "Miss Kitty would see any one who called."

In high glee, yet somewhat awed by her grown-up dignity, Kitty let Mary
brush her soft brown braided wig and Luly's golden curly one; then she
rushed into her mother's room in a hurry, called Luly out into the
entry, and the little sisters took hold of hands and went down stairs to
see the company.

Mr. Lacy was sitting by the window, looking out on the beautiful garden,
and did not know the children had entered until he felt a mite of a hand
put softly on his, and heard two little pipy voices saying, "How do you
do, Mr. Lacy?" The minister turned round and burst right out laughing!
for Kitty, when she ran into her mother's room, had put on--what do you
think?--why, one of mamma's caps, which was lying on the dressing table!
and the queer little thing looked so funny with the lace cap perched on
top of her head, that Mr. Lacy laughed heartily, and said, "Why, Kitty!
are you the old woman that lived in a shoe? or have you got bald all of
a sudden, that you have taken to caps?"

"Oh, I'm Little Mother!" said Kitty; "mamma has gone to the city, and
left me to take care of _the children_, and the house, and Dody, and
Trip, until she comes back; and I'm Little Mother to all of them."

"Well, Little Mother," said Mr. Lacy, who was none of your cross,
crabbed old ministers, with faces as sour as vinegar, and voices as
sharp as a needle, who frighten children half out of their wits,
forgetful that "of such is the kingdom of heaven;" "I hope your children
will be well brought up, and learn all they should. What does this one
know?" lifting Luly to his knee.

"I know 'ittle hymn," said Luly, smiling up confidently in his face.

"Can't you say it for me?" asked the minister. "What is it all about?"

"'Bout 'at a 'ittle child can do," lisped Luly.

"Say it, Luly," said Kitty.

Luly folded her cunning fat hands over each other, and crossed her feet.
Then she looked up sideways in Mr. Lacy's face, and sucked her tongue a
little bit, and at last, all at once, in a little singing voice, she
began:

          "I'm a very 'ittle maid;
             Hardly can I talk, 'tis true;
           Yet mamma I'd love to aid--
             What can 'ittle Luly do?

          "I can go, on busy feet,
             Errands for her all day through;
           Work for her, I feel, is sweet--
             This can 'ittle Luly do!

          "I can hold the gate long skein
             When 'tis tangled and askew;
           Never wanting to _compain_[A]--
             This can 'ittle Luly do!

          "I can search, her book to find,
             And be _glad_ to do it, too!
           I can always _quickly mind_--
             This can 'ittle Luly do!

          "I can ever go up stairs
             Cheerfully, when falls the dew;
           And with _yev'yence_[B] say my prayers--
             This can 'ittle Luly do!

          "GOD will help me, if I try;
             He good children loves to view;
           Dear Lord Jesus, from on high,
             _Pease_ tell Luly what to do!"


"Ah! that is a beautiful hymn," said the good minister. "Don't you know
any, Little Mother?"

"I am learning a beautiful hymn," said Kitty, "but I don't know it
yet--not quite."

"No?" said Mr. Lacy. "Then I shall have to tell you something myself, I
declare. Here, sit down beside me, and listen very attentively."

Now, what do you think the minister told them? "Some dreadful, dismal
story, full of dreadful, wicked children, who were sent to prison, I
suppose; or an account of how, if _they_ ever dared to run down stairs,
or look out of the window, or sneeze in church, on Sundays, they never
would get to Heaven!" perhaps you will say. Not a bit of it. He just
trotted Luly up and down on his knee, and told them these funny verses:

    "Three little kittens from home ran away,
          Oh dear! oh dear!
          And did you not hear
    All that befell them on that day?
     Dilly, and Dolly, and Poppledy-polly--
     Did you ever hear, in your life, of such folly!

    "Out they ran from their mother's door,
          And skipped, and tripped,
          And danced, and dipped,
    Way down the road, where they'd ne'er been before!
     Dilly, and Dolly, and Poppledy-polly,
     Oh deary! what _will_ be the end of their folly?

    "'Come let us go into this barn for mice!'
         'Oh don't!' 'Oh stuff!
         I'm hungry enough
    To eat anything that is sav'ry and nice!'
     So quoth little Dolly and Poppledy-polly,
     While Dilly looked on, quite aghast at their folly!

    "So in it they went, quite full of their fun,
         And stared, and glared,
         And meauoed, and scared
    The poor little mice till they made them all run!
     Dilly, and Dolly, and Poppledy-polly;
     For Dilly, I'm sorry to say, shared their folly.

    "But, alas! while the kittens were hunting up mice,
         And munching, and crunching
         Their smoking-hot _lunching_,
    A boy came and caught them all up in a trice!
     Dilly, and Dolly, and Poppledy-polly;
     _Oh!_ OH! OH! what a shocking cli_max_ to their folly!

    "Oh, how they struggled and mewed in their fright!
         And scratched, and snatched
         At the dismal old patched
    Bag they were thrust into, twisted up tight!
     Dilly, and Dolly, and Poppledy-polly;
     I warrant, they felt bad enough for their folly.

    "Soon to a stranger house they came;
         'Oh, ma'! oh, ma'!
         Now, only see _thar_!'
    Their captor cried out to an elderly dame;
     While Dilly, and Dolly, and Poppledy-polly
     Pricked up their ears, and lamented their folly.

    "'What, have you brought in a parcel of cats?
         Go straight to the pond
         And get 'em all drowned!!
    I won't have them here, I can tell you; now s'cats!'
     Poor Dilly, and Dolly, and Poppledy-polly
     Set up a loud howl of distress at their folly!

    "Off scampered the boy till he came to the bank
         Of a very deep pool;
         Oh, wasn't it _cruel_!
    And tossed in the bag!! To the bottom it sank!!!
     With Dilly (oh!), and Dolly (oh!), and Poppledy-polly (oh! oh!),
     And that was the end of their fun and their folly!"


                      MORAL.

    "So, children, I solemnly beg and implore,
         Whatever you do,
         (And you're torments a _few_,)
    You'll never slip out of your dear mother's door;
     Or, like Dilly, and Dolly, and Poppledy-polly,
     You'll surely be made to repent of your folly!"

The children were very much amused with this woful history, bursting out
laughing without any kind of fail when Poppledy-polly, of comical memory
and name, was mentioned. Luly said, "Oh, me _yike_ that name! me want to
call Dody Popply-polly." This made Kitty laugh more than ever, and they
had a great time chasing Dody round the hall, and catching her, to bawl
in her ears "Poppledy-polly!" by way of kindly informing her that was to
be her new name.

Dody didn't seem to like it much, for she jumped out of Luly's arms with
a squeal and a flourish of her long tail, and scampered off faster than
ever each time. After watching them, and laughing for a while, Mr. Lacy
rose to go, saying:

"Good-by, Little Mother; I must go and see some of the big mothers now.
Don't forget me on any account, and tell your mamma, when she comes
home, that I approve your style of housekeeping very much indeed."

"Good-by, Mr. Lacy," said Kitty. "Thank you for your funny story."

"Tank 'ou--funny 'tory!" repeated Luly after her sister.

Mr. Lacy lifted the little thing up to his shoulder, and held her there
a minute, saying, "Good-by, Poppledy-polly! I hope, when I come again,
you will know another hymn to say."

Luly didn't like much to be called Poppledy-polly, and she said, with
an air of considerable displeasure, "My name Luly May;" but when the
minister kissed her, and called her "his little lamb," she relented, and
cooed, "Me _yove_ 'ou, miniter!'

Then something quite sorrowful happened; for two great tears gathered in
the minister's eyes, and came slowly rolling down his kind face. Ah! he
thought of his own little pet lamb, who once lisped, too, "Me yove 'ou;"
who said so now to the dear Jesus; and with that last thought came
comfort. Floy was only "sleeping"--and setting little Luly gently down,
Mr. Lacy laid a hand on each childish head, saying, "God bless you, my
little lambs," and went quietly away. The children watched him drive
off, and then capturing Dody once more--by the end of her tail this
time--Kitty popped her in her apron; and lugged her up stairs in
triumph.

There they found Wawa, sitting on the floor, with an immense pair of
scissors held in both hands, and an expression of extreme horror on his
face. Mary had left the room, and Kitty, running up to her baby brother,
pulled away the scissors in a great fright, exclaiming, "Why, Wawa!
where did you get those?"

Wawa stared astonished for a moment, his great blue eyes opened very
wide indeed; then he bubbled out, "On yer fore (floor); yook! Gawow all
poil!" (spoiled); and poor Wawa puckered up his little rosy mouth,
and began to cry most piteously.

[Illustration: KITTY POPPED HER INTO HER APRON]

Luly popped on the floor beside him in a minute, and pulling his curly
head down on her breast, she murmured, "There--don't _c'y_, never
_matter_, dear _bedder_--s'eel get well!" while Kitty lifted up poor
Gawow, who was indeed in a pitiable condition. Walter had ornamented her
face with several deep digs of the scissors, which made her look as if
she had been to the wars and come home with a number of bullet holes in
her. Then, not satisfied with this--what does that monkey Wawa do but
rip up her whole body from the neck to the waist, and shake out every
bit of the bran all over the carpet! leaving the wretched Gawow with
not the least particle of insides.

Did you ever hear of such a piece of mischief? But then Walter was such
a little fellow--not quite two years old; of course he didn't mean to do
anything wrong, and nobody thought of blaming him; so Kitty called Mary
to come and sweep up the bran, and Luly and Walter were soon happily
engaged in stuffing Gawow with rags, making her look as good as new--or
as good as old, I might say; for she was such a direful object in the
first place, that it seemed as though she must have been bought in that
condition, and never could have been otherwise; after which they
dressed her in her very best bonnet and frock, and treated her to a nice
dance in the garden, all taking hold of hands; until Mary looked out of
the window and called them to come up to dinner.

Kitty was old enough, now, to dine with the grown folks, and behaved
like a perfect little lady, too; but on this occasion she was going to
take early dinner in the nursery.

She and Luly helped Mary pull out the nursery table, and set the three
little plates upon it. Walter's dinner was some mashed potato, with just
a tiny mite of chicken among it, minced very fine, and made into an
elegant hill on his plate, and a "wishing bone" to suck. Luly had the
same, only with more chicken; and Kitty cut up her own wing and slice of
breast, with her particular knife and fork, as nice as you please.

There was a great deal of merriment over the dinner, when Walter would
look away just as Mary gave him a spoonful of potato, watching her out
of the corner of his eye, though, and then bob round again and say
"Feed!" just as she had put it down, thinking he didn't want any more.
Then he insisted on making Gawow taste the wishing bone, and poked it
into both her eyes in succession, as if that was the usual way for
people to eat things. After they had finished the chicken and potato,
they had some nice custard pudding; and when dinner was over, Kitty
went right to the wash stand and _cleaned her teeth_, while Luly held up
her mouth to have Mary brush her little pearly teeth. Do you always do
this, little reader? If not, let me beg you to begin right away. Are
they done now? Very well, then let us go on with the story.

Pretty soon after, the children were dressed to go out walking; for it
was in the early spring time when all this happened, and still pleasant,
in the cold country, to take the middle of the day for going out. So
Kitty and Luly had their little blue poplin "coat-dresses" buttoned on,
and the soft white woollen hoods tied under their rosy faces, and Walter
was decked out in _his_ new blue coat; which pleased him so much that
he distinguished himself immediately afterward by walking all alone away
from the door to the window, quite across the room, and there sitting
down suddenly on the floor, much to his astonishment. At last they were
all ready and started off, Kitty and Luly hand in hand, and Walter in
his little carriage.

The road they liked best led along the top of a high bank, and was
called "Buena Vista" terrace. There were very pretty houses built along
here, shaded by tall trees; and if the children peeped cautiously over
the iron fence that guarded the edge of the bank, they could sometimes
see the steam cars rushing along the shore below. They were very fond
of watching the hurrying train go by, though it frightened them a
little, particularly when the engine gave a shrill scream before
stopping at the station about a quarter of a mile further on. Kitty and
Luly couldn't help squealing too when that happened, and then laughing
very much, and scampering on, playing they were steam engines.

Just as they were passing by the prettiest house on the terrace, out
came a young lady that Kitty and Luly knew and loved dearly, with a
"tremendous dog" stalking slowly after her.

"Why, Kitty!" she cried, "is that you? Nurse, do bring the children in.
I want to see them so much!"

So Mary went to open the gate; but before she could do so, up marched
Buffo, the "tremendous dog," and lifted the latch with his nose! Oh, how
Kitty and Luly did laugh and clap their hands! but their enjoyment and
surprise were at full height when the kind young lady, whom they called
Miss Ella, lifted Luly, and Mary held Wawa, on Buffo's shaggy back, and
the good fellow carried them both safely to the house. Wawa crowed and
laughed, and drummed with his heels against the side of his charger; but
the brave dog never tried to shake him off, and just walked gravely
along, looking as trustworthy as possible. Then, when the little
children got off, Kitty mounted somewhat fearfully on Buffo's broad
back, and rode all around the grass plot, laughing with delight.

After that, Miss Ella made them sit down in a great rocking chair on the
porch, wide enough for all three to get in at once, and asked them what
they had been doing that morning; and then Kitty told about her being
Little Mother, and Luly said, so funny, "Miniter tome see Luly and
Kitty, and tell funny 'tory 'bout Dilly, and Dolly, and Popply-polly;
and 'en--and 'en I talled Dody Popply-polly, and s'e wan away!"

That amused Miss Ella very much, and pretty soon she opened her
work-box, took out a paper of lemon drops, and gave Luly, and Kitty,
and Wawa each a handful. Luly was a generous little puss, and wanted
every one to share her "goodies;" so she even offered a lemon drop to
Buffo, when, what do you think the great black fellow did? He just put
his great fore paws on Luly's lap, opened his wide red mouth, and eat up
every one of the drops at a mouthful!

Poor Luly opened _her_ mouth in rueful astonishment, and looked very
much as if she was going to burst out crying; but Miss Ella consoled her
by giving her some more drops, and Wawa thrust one of his into her
mouth, saying, "Dog eat Luly's d'ops; Wawa torry."

So they talked away till it was time to go; and then Miss Ella kissed
her little visitors; and Buffo wanted to kiss them too, with his warm
red tongue; but Luly took good care to be out of the way this time. I
expect the little thing thought he would eat her up like a lemon drop;
so Kitty let him lick her hand instead; and then Buffo let Miss Ella put
Luly and Wawa on his back again, and rode them down to the gate, where
they bid good-by to their kind friend.

Tea was ready for them when they came back, and "when fell the dew" Luly
and Kitty went "cheerfully up stairs" to bed. And now a sweet, serious
expression came over Little Mother's face, and her great brown eyes were
filled with loving reverence, as Luly, in her little white night gown,
bent her golden curls on the lap of her sister, and lisped out "Now I
_yay_ me down to s'eep"--that dear, precious little verse that I think
all the children in the world must say; and prayed "Dear Jesus" to
"b'ess papa and mamma, and dear sister, and 'ittle bedder, and mate Luly
dood 'ittle child;" and as Little Mother's lips were murmuring those
words after her, the door opened, and there stood her own dear mamma and
papa, just home from the city; and oh! I can't tell you half how much
they loved their darling ones when they saw that sweet little scene.

And then there was a merry frolic with papa, who rode Luly and Wawa on
both shoulders as well as Buffo did; and a happy time with dear mamma,
who brought them three great oranges from grandma', and ever so many
kisses for her share; and a holy, blessed time when that dear mamma
knelt by her precious Kitty's bedside, and prayed God to bless and keep

                            LITTLE MOTHER.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote A: Complain]

[Footnote B: Reverence.]




DOLLS AT HOUSEKEEPING.


OF all the sweet little ten-year old maidens that ever laughed and
danced through their happy lives, I don't suppose one had such a
wonderful doll's house, or such a fine family of dolls, as Lina. Let me
describe the family and their residence.

In one of the upper rooms of Lina's house you would see, if you happened
to walk in, another whole house built. It is two stories high: its front
is red brick; and a flight of brown stone steps, made of sand-paper
glued over wood, leads up to the entrance. It has real sashes in the
windows, which open French fashion; a silver door-plate, with the name
of "Montague" upon it; and a little mat, about as large as a half
dollar, on the upper step! If we could make ourselves as small as dolls,
we might walk in, and find out that the hall has a dark wood floor, some
cunning little pictures hanging on the wall, a noble black walnut
staircase, and is lighted with a real little hall lamp.

The parlor, on one side of this hall, has a velvet carpet on the floor,
satin chairs and sofas, a centre table covered with tiny books, an
etagere full of ornaments, and a wicker-work flower stand filled with
flowers. Real little mantel and pier glasses are over the fire place,
and between the front windows, which are hung with elegant lace
curtains; and there is, besides, a piano-forte, a gold chandelier stuck
full of china wax-candles, and a little clock that can wind up--though
as to its going, that has to be imagined, for it obstinately represents
the time as a quarter to twelve, morning, noon, and night!

On the opposite side of the hall is the dining-room. It is furnished
with a fine side-board, holding a silver tea-set and some tiny glass
goblets and decanters; a round table, which is abominably disorderly, it
must be confessed, being spread with a table cloth all awry, and covered
with a grand dinner of wooden chickens and vegetables of various sorts;
a mould of yellow-glass jelly, and a pair of fancy fruit dishes, made of
cream candy. The dining-room chairs, with real leather seats, are
scattered about, and there is even the daily newspaper thrown down on
the floor, where the master of the house may have left it! Up stairs
there are three bedrooms, furnished in the same fashionable style; and,
in short, such an elegant doll's house is not to be found anywhere but
in a French toy shop. This one was brought from Paris by Lina's elder
brother, and set up in this very room last Christmas as a surprise for
his dear little sister. But it is time I should describe the family who
lived in this elegant mansion. So, little reader, if you will only take
fast hold of the end of the author's pen, shut up your eyes tight, and
then open them very quick on this page, heigh! presto! you and she will
be turned into little personages just the size of dolls, able to walk up
the brown stone steps, enter the house, and take a peep at the Montague
family.

On a lounge by the parlor fire sits an elegant lady, who is rather
skimpy about the wig, and therefore holds the honorable post of mamma to
the family; as this circumstance, combined with her looking excessively
inky about the nose, gives her a somewhat aged and anxious appearance.
She wears a blue silk dress with five flounces, a lace cap, and a watch
and chain; and her name is Mrs. Charles Augustus Montague. Her husband,
_Mr._ Charles Augustus, is a china doll with a crop of rather scrubby
flaxen hair, which can be combed and brushed as much as Lina chooses.
Although he is so rich, he has only one suit of clothes, and must even
go to parties in a pair of checked gingham trowsers, a red vest, and a
blue coat with brass buttons! He is supposed to be down town at present,
which circumstance is represented by his being unceremoniously thrust
into a corner upside down.

Several smaller wax and china boys and girls represent the family of the
ill-used Mr. Montague; but the belle of the whole doll-community is his
eldest daughter, Miss Isabella Belmont Montague. She is a waxen young
lady of the most splendid description; her hair is arranged like the
empress', whom, indeed, she greatly resembles; her feet and hands are of
wax, and she has more dresses than I can possibly count. I am afraid you
will scarcely believe me, but she actually has a real little ermine muff
and tippet, a pair of india-rubbers, an umbrella, a camels' hair shawl,
and _real corsets_! and was won, with all her wardrobe, at one of the
raffles in the great Union Bazaar. You went there, didn't you--you
cunning little kitten? and saw all the dolls? I hope you got one too, so
I do, certainly!

[Illustration: LINA MAKING DOLLS' CLOTHES.]

Besides the Montague family, there is a numerous colony of other dolls;
but they, poor things, live in any corner where Lina chooses to put
them; and all day Sunday are shut up in a dark closet, with nothing to
do but count their fingers and toes, if they can contrive to see them;
though they have nearly as fine a wardrobe--for Lina's great amusement,
next to playing with the whole colony, is to make new dresses for them.

One Saturday afternoon, Lina was playing with her dolls in the baby
house, with two of her little neighbors, Minnie and Maggie Elliott, to
keep her company. It was a dark, rainy sort of day; but what difference
did that make to the children? _They_ never wanted to make a parcel of
stupid morning calls, or go out shopping and spend all their money on
silly finery; no--they were full of their play in the house, and didn't
care a doll's shoe-string how hard it rained.

"Oh, dear!" said Lina at last; "seems to me this play is getting very
stupid! I wish we knew something else to play at but everlasting
'house!'"

"I'll tell you what would be great fun!" said little Minnie, looking
wise. "You know, Lina, we spent a week once in the country with 'Alice
Nightcaps;' and her sister, 'Aunt Fanny's' daughter, showed us such a
nice, funny play! Instead of our being mothers, and aunts, and fathers,
and the dolls our children, the dolls were all the people themselves,
and we moved them about and spoke for them."

"Yes, it was such a nice plan!" said Maggie; "you can't think, Lina.
Suppose we divide these dolls into families, and play that Miss Isabella
Belmont Montague was going to be married, and all about it."

"Oh, yes! yes! that will be splendid!" cried Lina. "Whom will you
manage, Maggie?"

"I'd rather have Miss Isabella," said Maggie.

"And I want Mr. Morris," said Minnie. "He shall be the lover."

"Very well, then I'll make the father and mother talk," said Lina,
generously taking the less splendid dolls, without a word of mean
complaint, such as "There, you hateful thing, you always want the best;"
or, "I _do_ wish I could do as I like with _my own_ dolls!" forgetting
that company must be allowed to take the best always. The other dolls
were equally divided between the children, and then Lina exclaimed, with
a delighted little skip in the air, "Now, we are all ready to begin!
Come, girls, what time shall it be?"

"Oh, have them at breakfast!" chimed both the little visitors; and so,
in defiance of the parlor clock, the time of day was supposed to be
eight in the morning. The children, with many little chuckling pauses,
while they considered what to do next, twitched the unlucky table cloth
straight, put the tea-set on the table, and gave the family a wooden
beefsteak for breakfast, and a large plateful of wooden buttered toast,
which came from a box full of such indigestible dainties. Then they
fished Mr. Charles Augustus Montague out of the corner, and set him
upright in a chair at the head of the table, with his newspaper fastened
in his hands, by having a couple of large pins stuck through it and
them. The points of the pins showed on the other side, and looked as if
he had a few extra finger nails growing on the backs of his hands. Quite
a curiosity he'd have been for Barnum's Museum, wouldn't he? you
precious little old toad.

Mrs. Montague was seated behind the tea-tray, and Miss Isabella was
reclining on a sofa up stairs, as if she was too lazy to come down when
the rest of the family did. As the front door was only large enough for
the dolls, the whole back of the house came away. Lina and her visitors
delightedly sat down cross-legged on the floor behind it, and the play
began, the children talking for the dolls.

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. MONTAGUE. (Lina speaks for her in a fine voice.) I wish you would
lay down your paper a moment, Charles; I want to speak to you.

MR. M. Well, my dear, I am listening.

MRS. M. No, you are not; put down the paper! [As this couldn't very well
be done by the gentleman himself, Maggie twitched it away for him, and
threw it under the table.]

MRS. M. Now, Charles, I must say I think it is high time Isabella was
married. She is most six months old, I declare! and it strikes me we had
better see if we can find her a husband.

MR. M. What you say is very sensible, my dear; so I will call to-day on
my friend Mr. Morris, and invite him to dinner. Perhaps they will fall
in love with each other.

MRS. M. Oh! but is he handsome, Mr. Montague?

MR. M. Handsome! I should rather think so! Why, he is nearly two feet
high, with curly black hair; a nose that can be seen at the side--which
is more than yours can be, Mrs. Montague--and eyes which open and shut
of themselves when he lies down or sits up. Then he is a Seventh
Regimenter, too, and always wears his uniform; which makes him look very
genteel.

MRS. M. Oh, I am sure he must be lovely! Do bring him to dinner this
very day.

Here Maggie made the dining-room door open, and in walked Miss Isabella.
She wore a pink merino morning dress, open in front, to show her
embroidered petticoat, a pair of bronze slippers with pink bows, and a
net with steel beads in it. Maggie set her down hard in one of the
chairs, and pushed her up to the table; while Minnie, who moved the
nigger boy doll, who waited on table, picked him up by his woolly
top-knot, from the floor, where he had tumbled, and made him hand the
young lady a cup of tea. Then Maggie began:

MISS ISABELLA. Dear me, mamma! this tea's as cold as a stone! I wish you
would have breakfast a little later; as I'm so tired when I come home
from a party, that I can't think of getting up at seven o'clock.

MRS. M. But you must get up, my love. Besides, we want plenty of time
to-day, so's we can be ready; for we are going to have company to
dinner.

ISABELLA. Who is coming, mamma?

MRS. M. Mr. Morris, my dear.

ISABELLA. Oh, I am so glad!

MRS. M. Yes, you're going to be married to-morrow, my dear; we will
invite all our relations and friends, and you must have a white satin
wedding dress; you certainly must.

ISABELLA. How nice! S'pose we go out and buy it now.

MRS. M. We can't go to-day; it's our _eceptin_ (reception) day, you
know.

MR. M. Well, I 'spect I must go down town. Good-by, my dears. I shall
certainly ask Mr. Morris to dinner. He's a very nice young man for a
small dinner party.

So the children made Mr. Montague kiss his wife and daughter; which they
did by bumping his china nose against their cheeks, until it nearly made
a dent in the wax; and then pranced him down the front steps, and put
him in his corner again.

Then Minnie's doll came in. She took up Mr. Morris, a composition doll,
in a Seventh Regiment uniform, who had been bought at a fair, and began
moving him across the floor until he was opposite the door. Then she
commenced talking.

MR. MORRIS. Why, I declare! here is Mr. Montague's house. I think I
will go in and make a call.

And he ran up the steps, and pretended to ring the bell; but as it was
only a handle, Lina rang the dinner bell instead.

MR. MORRIS. It's very funny they don't answer the bell!
(Ting-a-ling-ling.) Come! make haste, I want to get in.

Here Minnie took up Toby, the black boy, carried him to the front door,
and kindly opened it for him.

TOBY. Laws, massa! is dat you? I was jus' tastin' de jolly, to be sure
it was good for dinner! so I couldn't come no sooner.

MR. MORRIS. Is Miss Isabella Belmont Montague at home?

TOBY. Yes, massa, de ladies is to hum; walk in de parlor.

So Mr. Morris came in (with Minnie's hand behind him), and sat down on
the sofa. It was rather small for him, and he covered it up so much that
there wasn't a bit of room for Miss Isabella, when she came down. Maggie
had dressed her meanwhile in her green silk skirt, which had real little
three-cornered pockets, with an embroidered pocket handkerchief sticking
out of one, and her white tucked waist.

Up jumped Mr. Morris, and made her such an elegant bow, that his cap,
which he was obliged to keep on all the time, in consequence of the
strap being glued fast under his chin, fell all to one side; and looked
as if the top of his head had accidentally come off and been stuck on
crooked.

MR. MORRIS. Good morning, Miss Isabella; how do you do?

_Isabella_. Very well, thank you. How do you do, Mr. Morris?

MR. MORRIS. Oh, Miss Isabella, I should be quite well if I hadn't
_sitch_ a pain in my heart!

ISABELLA. A pain in your heart! What makes you have that, Mr. Morris?

MR. MORRIS. YOU!

ISABELLA. I!

MR. MORRIS. Oh, Miss Isabella, you can't think how I adore you! I love
you so much that it makes my eyes shut up when I don't want them to;
and my heart beats so that it shakes my cap all to one side!

ISABELLA. Dear me, Mr. Morris, you are quite _afflitted_! but never
mind--papa is going to have you to dinner to-day; you'd better go right
down town, so he can ask you.

MR. MORRIS. But I can't eat any dinner, Miss Isabella, without you will
marry me!

Here Minnie tried to make Mr. Morris pop down on his knees; but as he
wasn't a jointed doll, he lost his balance, and tumbled flat on his face
instead.

MISS ISABELLA. Here, what are you doing? get up, do, and stop your
noise! [For Minnie couldn't help a long-sounding o--h! when her doll
flopped down. So Maggie made the young lady catch hold of Mr. Morris's
shoulder straps and help twitch him on the sofa again, to go on with his
proposal.]

MR. MORRIS. Will you marry me, Miss Isabella? I'm such a nice young
man--you don't know--and we'll live in a real pretty house.

MISS ISABELLA. No, I can't marry you till after you have come to dinner;
mamma said so.

MR. MORRIS. Well, then, I must wait; but only say that you will have me.

ISABELLA. Oh, yes!

At this point the children laid down the dolls and broke into such a
merry trill of laughter, that it would have done anybody's heart good to
hear them. It seemed so funny to have the dolls making love in this
fashion, they couldn't help it. As soon as they were sober again, the
play went on thus:

MR. MORRIS. Well, Miss Isabella, I b'lieve I must go now; I've got an
old sister at home, who will scold me if I don't come back. Can't you
'vite her too? She has a pretty bad time, poor thing! 'cause she is so
oldy that she is kept on a shelf till she's all dusty. Her wig is
dreadful fuzzy, and some of it comes out and stands up at the top. But
I'll dust her well and stick a pin in her wig to keep it on, and make
her look real nice, if you'll only ask her.

ISABELLA. Well, I guess she can come; but she must have a new dress for
the wedding.

MR. MORRIS. Yes, she shall, certainly. Good-by, Miss Isabella. I'm going
down town pretty soon, so your father can ask me to come.

MISS ISABELLA. Oh yes, do! I want you to come _velly_ much.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Now, Maggie, we must stop the play a little while," said Lina, "and fix
the dinner for them."

"Yes, do," cried Maggie; "let's see, what shall be for dinner?"

"Oh, chicken, that's the nicest!" said Minnie.

"No, they had chicken yesterday," said Lina; "let them have roast
beef."

"Very well," went on Maggie, who was looking over the dishes in the box
of "eatables," as Lina called them. "Roast beef, mashed potatoes, and
macaroni."

"Oh, not macaroni," cried Minnie; "the cheese will bite their tongues."

"Oh, yes! Mr. Morris likes macaroni," said her sister.

"Well, macaroni, then; and plum-pudding for dessert--and apples."

"Ah, make them have jelly," said Lina; "that's the prettiest thing in
the box."

So the dinner was hunted out, and the three children set the table in
fine style; while Toby, the black boy, whose business it certainly was
to have done it, sat coolly in Mr. Montague's armchair, with his
master's newspaper in his lap, and goggled at the table without moving
an inch. Then Lina dressed Mrs. Montague, and Maggie and Minnie together
dressed Miss Isabella; and nobody dressed poor Mr. Morris, or Mr.
Charles Augustus Montague; because they unluckily had but one suit a
piece, sewed fast on to them at that.

This time Miss Isabella wore a pink silk frock, with a deep puffing
round the bottom, finished at each edge with black velvet. Then she had
a long pink sash, edged with two rows of narrow black velvet; a pointed
belt encircled her waist, and the body of her dress was a mass of puffs,
with narrow black velvet between. On her head was a pink wreath, with
long ribbon ends hanging down her back; and tied fast to her wrist was a
pink feather fan with gold sticks. In fact, Miss Isabella looked rather
as if she were going to a party than coming down to dinner; but the
children thought the pink silk so charming, that she must wear it,
whether or no.

Mrs. Montague wore a purple silk, a black lace shawl, and a head-dress
of pink rosebuds and black lace.

When the ladies were fairly seated in the parlor, Lina rang the bell,
and Minnie and Maggie made Mr. Morris come in, leading his sister by the
hand. She was a dismal object to behold, sure enough! and if she could
have blushed for herself, I think she certainly would. She wore a green
barege dress, trimmed with flaming red ribbons; some of the gathers were
out at the waist, and her petticoat showed at the bottom.

Mr. Morris, or Minnie--I don't know which--had stuck the ends of her wig
down for her once, but they had come up again, and looked as if her hair
had taken to growing with the roots uppermost. The end of her nose was
blacker than Mrs. Montague's, and her eyes, which moved with a wire like
other wax dolls, had got out of order somehow, and remained stationary,
with nothing but the whites showing; and, altogether, poor Miss Morris
looked like a two-legged rag-bag come home from the wars, with both
eyes out, half a nose, and no hair worth mentioning.

Lina made Mr. Montague come home as soon as she was rid of the dinner
bell; and after they had all shaken hands until their wax and kid and
china wrists must have ached, the company rather unceremoniously marched
right into the dining-room. I suppose Mr. Montague was tremendously
hungry, and gave his wife's hand a good pinch when he shook it, to make
her hurry things up; but, however that may be, they were walked in to
dinner in straight order. Mr. Morris sat by Miss Isabella, with his
forlorn old sister on the other hand, and as the opposite side of the
table looked rather bare, Minnie proposed that some of the children
should come down to fill up.

"Oh, yes--and let them be dreadfully naughty and do all sorts of
mischief," said Maggie. So Miss Angelina Seraphina Montague, and Master
Algernon Pop-eyes Montague (so called because he had glass eyes, which
stuck out in a lobster-ish fashion), were sent for in a hurry and
brought down by their nurse, a beautiful doll dressed as a French bonne,
and Maggie. Algernon wore the costume of a sailor boy, and Angelina was
no other than a nun in a black robe! But never mind, they did very well
to fill up, and sat smirking at the company very genteelly.

So, then, Lina made Mr. Montague begin.

MR. MONT. Will you take some roast beef, Miss Morris?

ALGERNON. No, papa, help me first!

MR. M. Algy Pop-eyes Montague! be still! Here, Toby, hand Miss Morris
her plate.

ALGY. Don't you do it, Toby!

MRS. M. Hush up, you naughty boy!

MR. M. Mr. Morris, here's some meat for you.

MRS. M. Take some macaroni, Mr. Morris; it's real good.

MR. MORRIS. Thank you, ma'am; I think I will.

So the company were helped; though, as the meat and vegetables were
glued fast to the dishes they were on, I'm afraid they must have had
rather a slim dinner.

Then Maggie went on.

MISS ISABELLA. Mr. Morris, I think I am rather tired of that uniform of
yours; it makes you look too high in the neck. When we are married, you
ought to have a dress coat.

ANGELINA. H-a! h-a-a-a! he hasn't got any other coat! _I_ wouldn't marry
an old goose with only one suit!

MRS. M. For shame, Miss! your father hadn't but one when we were
married; but, bless me! what _is_ Algernon doing?

Sure enough, Master Algy _was_ doing something extraordinary, for Maggie
had made him overset the dish of potatoes in the middle of the table,
and then jump up and sit on the back of his chair, with both legs in the
air!

MRS. M. My pasence! _what_ a naughty boy! Toby, take this bad boy right
up stairs; I am socked! (shocked.)

ALGY. Oh, boo-hoo! boo-hoo! please let me stay!

MRS. M. Well, then, behave yourself.

MISS MORRIS. Mrs. Montague, I think you had _better_ send your children
away; they are too bad for anything.

ANGELINA. Oh! oh! I wouldn't be your child for a dollar! ("That's just
what I say to my big sister!" put in Maggie in her proper person.)

MRS. M. Oh, they are dear little things; they only do it in fun, Miss
Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Well, I don't see it. If they were my children, I should
lock them up in a dark closet.

MISS MORRIS. So should I.

ANGELINA. H-a! h-a-a-a! that's just where you are kept yourself!

MISS MORRIS. Oh, I _shall_ faint!

MRS. M. Angelina! you sha'n't have any pudding for being so bad. There,
I guess it's time for dessert,"--and without condescending to ask if the
company were through dinner, Mrs. Montague, with a wave of her
lily-white kid hand, ordered Toby to clear away the dishes; and, the
pudding and jelly being put on the table, Lina went on:

MR. M. Miss Morris, have some plum-pudding?

TOBY. No, take some ob de jolly, missis; he so _jolly_ good! _I_ taste
um!

Mr. M. Toby, I am _astonissed_! I shall have to discharge you to-morrow.

"And have an Irishman come!" cried Minnie; "and talk funny, like our
Patrick!"

"Yes, that will be real fun!" said Lina. "There, they have had dinner
enough; let them go in the parlor now."

Accordingly, the company had their chairs pushed back for them and were
taken into the parlor, all but the naughty children, who had to be sent
straight to bed, they were so bad. Mr. and Mrs. Montague took
possession of the arm chairs, as they were the oldest; Miss Morris was
accommodated with an uncommonly hard ottoman without any back, in the
corner; Mr. Morris plumped down on the sofa, as that was the only seat
large enough for him, and the play went on (Minnie speaking).

MR. MORRIS. Miss Isabella, I wish you would sing us a song.

ISABELLA. Oh, really, I have _sitch_ a bad cold. I don't think I can.

MR. MORRIS. Oh, please do, Miss Isabella! Sing that pretty song about
the little milkmaid.

ISABELLA. Well, I'll see if I can.

So Maggie made the young lady take a funny little scrap of music out of
the stand (called a Canterbury), and put it on the piano. The title of
the piece on the outside was, "Souvenirs de l'Opera," which means in
English "Recollections of the Opera," but it did just as well for a
song. Miss Isabella was seated at the piano, and Maggie moved her hands
up and down the keys, to look as if she were playing; while in her own
sweet bird-like voice she sang for her this song:

          "'Where are you going, my pretty maid?
           Where are you going, my pretty maid?'
           'I'm going a milking, sir,' she said,
           'I'm going a milking, sir,' she said.

          "'May I go with you, my pretty maid?
           May I go with you, my pretty maid?'
           'Yes, if you please, kind sir,' she said,
           'Yes, if you please, kind sir,' she said.

          "'What is your father, my pretty maid?
           What is your father, my pretty maid?'
           'My father's a farmer, sir,' she said,
           'My father's a farmer, sir,' she said.

          "'Oh, then may I marry you, my pretty maid?
           Then may I marry you, my pretty maid?'
           'Yes, if you please, kind sir,' she said,
           'Yes, if you please, kind sir,' she said.

          "'What is your _fortune_, my pretty maid?
           What is your _fortune_, my pretty maid?'
           'My _face_ is my fortune, sir,' she said,
           'My _face_ is my fortune, sir,' she said.

          "'Oh, then I _can't_ marry you, my pretty maid!
           But then I _won't_ marry you, my pretty maid!'
           'Nobody asked you, sir!' she said,
           'NOBODY ASKED YOU, SIR!!' she said!"

The dolls all clapped their hands very hard when Miss Isabella finished
singing, as if they liked it "first rate." Mr. Morris leaned back so far
in his seat, either from admiration or because he was slipping off,
that his eyes suddenly shut up, and opened with a queer little pop
inside of him when Minnie righted him. As to Miss Morris, she glared at
the company with her old white eyeballs as if she was looking down
inside of herself to see how the pudding had agreed with her.

Then Maggie went on.

MISS ISABELLA. There! how do you like _that_?

MR. MORRIS. Oh, thank you, Miss Isabella; it's the sweetest song I ever
heard.

MRS. MONTAGUE. Won't you sing us a song, Mr. Morris?

MR. M. No, I believe I must go now. I have all my things to pack up, so
we can start off travelling right away. Come, sister, stick the roots of
your hair in, and open your distressed looking eyes, and let us be off
home.

"I wonder if her eyes _will_ open?" said Maggie.

"Let's try!" said Lina. "Give the wire a good, hard pull."

As she spoke, she caught hold of the wire and gave a tremendous jerk,
when, dreadful to relate, POP! out came poor Miss Morris's eyes
completely! and tumbled down somewhere inside of her! leaving two great
holes in her head of the most fearful description!

The children stared at her in round-eyed astonishment. Now she was
certainly too hideous to come to the wedding; and the little girls
tried to look as sorry as they could for her, but it was no use; Miss
Morris was such a ridiculous object, that they all three burst into fits
of laughing. Lina, who had hold of the poor thing, shook so with glee,
that the eyes rattled up and down inside her head like a pack of
crackers going off, which made the children laugh still more.

At last Minnie contrived to check herself, and made the brother say,
rather unfeelingly:

Mr. Morris. There you go with your eyes out! A pretty figure you've made
of yourself.

Miss Isabella. Oh! _oh!!_ OH!!! OH!!!!

MRS. M. Goody, Isabella's got the hysterics! Get some water, quick! what
shall I do?

MISS MORRIS. Oh, my eye! my eye! it's _sich_ a pain!

MR. MONTAGUE. Toby, bring some water this minute.

TOBY. (_Minnie brings him in with a pitcher._) Here, massa, here de
water. My! see de ole woman wid her eye out! ha! ha!

MRS. M. Toby, put down that water, and go 'way.

Minnie accordingly made believe that Toby was pouring water right on the
floor; then she turned the pitcher upside down in his hand, and spoke
for him.

TOBY. Dere de water, missis.

MRS. M. Oh! it's all over the carpet! How dare you, Toby?

TOBY. Why, missis, you _told_ me to put down de _water_!

MRS. M. Oh, I shall go distracted!

MR. MORRIS. Come, sister, I 'spect you'd better go home and send for
Doctor Bumpstead! Maybe he can fish up your eyes again, and stick them
in right side out. A--h! good-by, Miss Isabella, good-by, Mrs. Montague!

ALL THE DOLLS IN CHORUS. Good-by, a--h!

"Oh! did ever anybody have such a funny play before!" cried Lina, fairly
dropping Miss Morris, and clapping her hands with delight. "I mean
always to play in this way."

"Yes, it is so nice!" said Minnie. "But, come, Lina, how shall we dress
Miss Isabella to get married?"

"Oh, she has a wedding-dress all ready," replied Lina; "white silk with
lace over."

"Splendid!" cried both the sisters.

"Now, if Mr. Morris could only have a plain suit, he would look so much
more like a bridegroom."

"Well, perhaps sister will make him one," said Lina; "but what shall we
do with poor Miss Morris?"

The recollection of Miss Morris's mishap set them off again laughing;
and finally they decided that she might come to the wedding, but must
keep her handkerchief to her eyes all the time, as if she were quite
overcome by having her brother married; as well she might be, for how
would her two holes instead of eyes compare with Miss Isabella Belmont
Montague's charms?

This point settled, Lina and her little visitors were just beginning to
review the other dolls, to see who would look best at the wedding, when
a knock came at the door, and in walked Mary, Lina's nurse, to say that
Minnie and Maggie were sent for!

"Oh, what a pity!" cried Lina. "I wish you could stay all day, and all
night, and all the rest of the time. It's too bad!"

"Oh, that the afternoons were forty-'leven times as long!" said Maggie.
"Well, we must go, I suppose. Good-by, Lina; we'll come Monday
afternoon, if mamma will let us; and finish the play."

So the children kissed each other, and Minnie and Maggie were bundled up
in their warm coats and hoods, and went home. As soon as they were gone,
Lina ran to her sister Alice with Mr. Morris, and begged her to make him
a suit of black to get married in, as Miss Isabella had expressed her
preference for that style of dress. Alice kindly promised she would, and
that very evening she hunted up some black cloth that was left from a
cloak of her mother's, and in a few hours Mr. Morris was rigged out in
the last style of fashion. Here is his carte de visite, taken in his
wedding clothes. You see, the photograph man left his own hat on the
table by mistake; doesn't it look funny?

[Illustration: Portrait of Mr. Morris.]

It was past Lina's bedtime before Mr. Morris was completely dressed; but
she was allowed to sit up "just this once," and when he was finished,
she kissed Alice a great many times, carried him off in triumph, and
shut him up tight in a box, for fear his clothes should get tumbled.

Monday afternoon, Minnie and Maggie came again, bringing with them a
dear little wax doll of Minnie's, and a great paper of sugar-plums, to
"play party" with. When Mr. Morris had been sufficiently admired in his
new clothes, the children collected the other dolls, and put the
Montague family in their house again. Mr. Montague was left all alone in
the parlor to receive the company, and the ladies were up stairs in the
front bed room. Miss Isabella's wedding dress was spread out on the
elegant French bed, all ready for her to wear; and as it is a well-known
fact that a fashionable lady cannot possibly get dressed in less than
three hours, the time was put at nine o'clock, as the wedding would take
place at twelve.

Lina then began the play:

MRS. MONTAGUE. Come, my dear, it is time for you to dress; you've only
got three hours to get all ready in.

MISS ISABELLA. Yes, mamma, I am putting on my shoes now. (That is,
Maggie was putting them on.) Oh, dear! they are a great deal too tight!
they hurt me _dreadfully_. Please let me take them off.

MRS. M. No, they are not; they are a beautiful fit; don't be silly,
Isabella.

ISABELLA. I think you are real mean! There, they are on; now I must put
on my dress.

Here Maggie made her stand up, and Lina put on her dress and fastened
it.

ISABELLA. Oh, my! what a beautiful dress! Can't I keep it on all the
time, mamma?

MRS. M. Why, no; of course not! This is your wedding dress.

ISABELLA. Well, then, I mean to get married over again next year, so I
can wear it some more.

MRS. M. Now I must put on your veil, my dear, and then you will be all
ready.

Here Maggie clapped her hands to express Miss Isabella's joy, while Lina
put on the veil.

ISABELLA. Oh, how pretty I look!

MRS. M. Don't be vain, Isabella. There, you are dressed; sit down now,
while I get ready.

So Miss Isabella sat down with her new frock sticking out all around
her, like a perfect balloon, a most magnificent creature to behold! Her
dress was made of white silk, trimmed all round the bottom with deep
blonde lace, which was finished at the top with narrow silver cord. It
was looped up on one side with a bouquet of white flowers, with silver
leaves, and her waist was covered with a blonde lace bertha, and had a
bouquet of the same flowers on the front, called a _corsage_. She wore a
lace veil and a wreath of orange blossoms, and in her hand, tied fast
there, was another large bouquet, and a lace-bordered pocket
handkerchief. As to Mrs. Montague, she was hardly less splendidly
attired, in a mauve silk with eleven flounces, a lace collar and
sleeves, and a superb diamond breastpin--made of glass.

Well, dear me, I don't know how I can find room enough to describe all
the splendid ladies that came to the wedding. They were none of them
quite as elegant as Miss Isabella Belmont Montague, but they all had on
their Sunday-go-to-meeting, Fourth-of-July, Christmas-and-New-Year's
best clothes, and looked as fine as fiddles. Poor Miss Morris came, with
her handkerchief up to her eyes, and stayed so all the time, crying as
if her heart would break, I presume. She was so dismal, in her old green
barege, that Minnie kindly dressed her in Mrs. Montague's purple silk,
which fitted her quite well; so she didn't look so _very_ bad, after
all. Aren't you glad? I am.

Pretty soon in came the minister, who was no other than Angelina! as her
black nun's robe was the most like a gown that could be found; and when
she was set up with her back against the centre table, the parlor door
opened, and in marched the bride and bridegroom. Minnie and Maggie held
them in their proper places, and the minister married them in rhyme;
which, it strikes me, was a new style. This was what he said:

          "Now you're married, you must obey;
           You must be true to all you say,
           And live together all your life;
           And I pronounce you man and wife!"

When the marriage ceremony was over, the children set Mr. and Mrs.
Morris down side by side on the sofa, and leaving them to entertain the
company, and talk for themselves if they could, got the supper ready.
It was such a grand supper that they were obliged to have a table from
up stairs besides the dining table. Everything in the box of eatables
was brought out, even the roast beef and buttered toast, two dishes not
ordinarily seen at suppers. The sugar-plums were disposed around
wherever room could be found, and when everything was ready, Minnie took
Toby to the parlor door and made him say:

              TOBY.
          Ladies and gentlemens, please to come to supper,
          Plum cake, and cream cake, and white bread and butter.

Up jumped Mr. Morris in such a violent hurry that he nearly tumbled
over, and offered his arm to his bride; which Minnie made him do by
bending it round, and pinning his kid hand fast to his waistcoat.
Maggie and Lina made the rest of the company walk after them in
procession, as fast as they could lift them up; and they all pranced and
paraded round by the back of the house into the dining room. Only poor
Miss Morris was left out, and she had tumbled off her chair, and was
lying behind the piano, on the top of her head, with one leg sticking
straight up in the air like an awning post, and the other foot
apparently boxing her ears, as it was turned back in a most
extraordinary manner, till it touched her head.

Meanwhile, there were fine times going on in the dining room. Mr.
Montague took the foot of the table, and the bride and groom the head.
As soon as they were all seated, Mr. Montague said:

MR. MONTAGUE. Ladies and gentlemen, don't you think we'd better drink
the bride's health? Here, Toby, give the company some wine glasses.

MRS. M. Dear me, ladies, what a pity! there's only six goblets; so the
rest will have to drink out of teacups!

ALL THE DOLLS (or all the three little girls, whichever you please). Oh,
never mind; that doesn't make any _difference_.

MR. MONT. The bride, ladies and gentlemen!

ALL THE DOLLS. Mrs. Morris! hurray! hurree! hurror!

MRS. M. Now, Isabella, it's time for you to change your dress, my dear.
You are going travelling, you know.

ISABELLA. Oh, what a pity! I don't want to take it off a bit!

But, of course, she had to. It wouldn't have done to go travelling in a
white silk dress, would it, you dear little poppet?

So Maggie took Miss Isabella (for they called her either that or Mrs.
Morris by turns, indifferently), away from table, and dressed her in her
gray travelling dress, which was trimmed with black velvet and small
steel buttons. Then she put on her second best bonnet, with a blue veil,
and her India-rubbers, in case it should be damp, and locked up the
wedding dress in her trunk, which was about as large as a candle box,
had a real little lock and key, and her initials painted on the side.
When she was all ready, down she came again, to take leave of her
relations and friends, who had eaten up all the wooden refreshments by
this time (though, strange to say, the dishes seemed as full as ever),
while Minnie, Maggie, and Lina eat up the sugar plums; and poor Miss
Morris sucked her thumbs, I suppose, for not a speck of anything else
did she get.

There was a great time bidding good-by, and so many hard noses were
bumped against the bride's cheek this time, that they made a dent, which
looked quite like a dimple, and improved her appearance very much
indeed. As to Mr. Morris, nobody took the slightest notice of him, as is
usually the case with the bridegroom, but he didn't seem to mind it in
the least; for he went on smirking at the company as blandly as ever.
Perhaps he didn't want people's noses making holes in _his_ face; you
wouldn't want them made in _yours_, would you? you dear little Pinkey
Winkey! Bless your heart! there's dimples enough in that cunning face
already.

But now the carriage was brought round to the door, for Mr. and Mrs.
Morris to go on their travels. It was made of--ahem!--tin, and was drawn
by two dashing tin horses, with tails like comets, and manes like
waterfalls, and such a great number of bright red spots painted all
over them, that they looked as if they had broken out with a kind of
scarlet measles.

The bride and bridegroom were put in their places, the big trunk was
hoisted up in front, and away they went! and travelled all the way down
the entry to the head of the stairs, and through sister Alice's room to
the fireplace! My! what a long journey! 'most a hundred miles, I should
think! that is, it would seem so to dolls.

Thus ended the grand play of Miss Isabella Belmont Montague's wedding,
which had taken two whole afternoons to finish, and which the children
thought the most _interestingest_ play that ever was. If you want to
know what became of her after that, I advise you to go right to Lina's
house and ask how Mr. and Mrs. Morris come on with their housekeeping!
That's all there is of this story--BOO!!




THE FAIRY WISH.


ONCE upon a time there lived a little old man, with his little old wife,
in a little old house that ran on wheels. Did you ever? Well, I never
did.

The reason why the little old house ran on wheels was, that the little
old man used to keep a monkey show in it, and drove it about for a
caravan; with an old white horse, that had a blind eye, to draw it; but
now the monkeys were all dead and buried, and the little old man and
woman lived all alone-ty-donty. It had bright green blinds, bright red
sides, a bright blue door, and bright yellow steps. On the bright blue
door there was a bright brass knocker, which was polished up at such a
rate that you could see your face in it, looking as l-o-n-g as anything;
and underneath that was a bright brass door plate, with the old
showman's name, "Timmy Timmens," on it, which was also polished up until
you could see your face in it, looking as b-r-o-a-d as anything. Did you
_ever_? Well, I _never_ did!

Inside there was a rag carpet of all the colors of the rainbow; a little
old four-post bedstead, with a patchwork counterpane; two high-backed
rocking chairs, with patchwork covers over the backs; a table with an
oil cloth cover, that had a little old tea tray on it, set up against
the wall; two bright brass candlesticks, and a china tea set; and in one
corner was a glass cupboard, which contained the other plates and
dishes. Hung against the wall over the mantlepiece was a sampler worked
by Mrs. Timmy Timmens when she was a girl, which represented Noah's ark,
with all the animals, of exactly the same size, done in cross stitch, in
such bright grass-green worsted that it quite set your teeth on edge to
look at it. Besides these, there was a little round stove, with a long
stove pipe, that came out on top of the caravan, and ended with a
flourishing weathercock, representing a fat old woman in a high gale,
with her umbrella turned inside out; which moved when the smoke came
puffing up harder than usual, and had no connection whatever with any
wind that blew.

Now, Mr. Timmy Timmens and his wife, being mighty simple old people,
were fond of reading fairy stories, and believed entirely in every word
of them. They hadn't the smallest doubt that sprites and fairies were as
common as peas this very minute, and would have thought it quite a
matter of course if a wonderful gift had suddenly tumbled down the very
stove pipe, or a beautiful lady come bursting through the wall, and
offered to carry them off to fairy land in a mother-of-pearl chariot,
drawn by milk-white doves. If a cat looked hard at her and mewed
piteously, the little old woman would sigh, "Well, this _is_ fairy work,
I'll bet a crooked sixpence! She looks like an enchanted princess, poor
thing! don't she, Timmy, dear?" If a donkey brayed louder than usual,
and seemed more obstinate than ever before, the little old man would
exclaim, "There, I told you so! an unfortunate young man, of surpassing
beauty, enchanted in this dreadful shape by a wicked fairy! That's plain
to be seen! No wonder he utters such cries of distress!" and then they
both groaned together, and waggled their heads, and blew their noses so
exactly in time with two yellow silk pocket handkerchiefs, that people
thought two fishmen must be blowing their horns at once. Did _you_
ever? Well, _I_ never did!

[Illustration: THE OLD MAN AND WOMAN LOOKING FOR FAIRIES.]

One fine morning the little old man and woman went out to take a walk on
the common; for the house stood right beside the road, in an empty field
of scrubby grass, with no fence round it. Just behind the house, to be
sure, was a paling, which enclosed a garden about as big as a good-sized
dining table, where the little old man and woman grew one or two
cabbages, two or three tomatuses, three or four potatuses, and four or
five radishes, for their own eating; but all the rest was just open
common. The old woman had a large basket in her hand, all ready to pop
down over any fairies she might see lying asleep in a bluebell, and the
old man was leaning heavily on his stick, as he was rather feeble, and,
besides, had the rheumatism in his big toe.

"Dear me, Timmy," said the old woman, "what a good thing it would be,
now, if we could only find a kind fairy who would move our house for us
somewhere nearer the village. Now that poor old Dobbin is dead--killed,
I've no doubt, by a wicked enchanter--we can no longer get around from
place to place without stirring a step from the house; and we are so far
away, that we can't walk over to take tea with any of our neighbors. Do
let us keep a sharp lookout as we walk along, and see if we can't find
a fairy ring or a fairy flower."

"With all my heart!" said Tim; and so they tottered along, peering very
hard into all the bushes, and hurrying to examine every little patch of
grass that looked greener and brighter than the rest, in the hope that
it was a fairy ring. All at once, the little old man stopped short, and
pointed with his stick at a beautiful spray of foxglove.

"There!" cried Mr. Timmens.

"Where?" cried Mrs. Timmens.

"Right before your eyes!" said the little old man. "Don't you see it? A
fairy foxglove, as my name is Timmy Timmens!"

"My goodness gracious, stars, and what's-his-names!" cried the little
old woman; "so there is! as sure as my name is Polly Timmens!"

So the little old man and woman hurried up to the flower, and after
trying a great many times to stoop down, making their old joints crack
like so many torpedoes, Mrs. Polly succeeded in plucking it, and off
they went, pell-mell, hurry-scurry, to the little old house that ran on
wheels, to consult their fairy story books, and see what was the right
thing to be done in such a case! _Did_ you ever? Well, I never _did_.

Down sat the little old man in _his_ rocking chair with the patchwork
cover, and down sat the little old woman in _her_ rocking chair with
the patchwork cover; and after a long consultation of the "Sorrows of
Prince Popinjay," and the "Wonderful History of the Princess Lillie
Bulero and the Fairy Allinmieyeo," they discovered that the proper way
to do was to hold the fairy foxglove in your hand exactly as the clock
struck twelve, at noon, and say

          "Rorum corum torum snoram,
           Highcum tickleme cockolorum!"

seven times; then shut your eyes tight and wish, stand on one leg and
turn round three times, and, presto! you would find, when you opened
your eyes, that your wish was accomplished!

"Dear me!" cried Mrs. Polly Timmens when her husband had finished
reading this wonderful charm; "how lucky it is that we should be the
ones to find the fairy foxglove! just as we were wishing, too, for
something of the sort. Let me see, it is half past eleven now, I
declare! Timmy, my dear, I'll go into the garden and gather two or three
tomatuses and three or four potatuses for dinner, for it would be a
shame to leave our fine vegetables behind; and then, as the clock
strikes twelve, we'll try the fairy spell, wish that our house was in
the village, and see what comes of it."

So the little old woman, taking a small basket off a nail, and a sharp
knife in her hand, went into the garden to gather the vegetables. Down
she plumped beside the bed, and began to dig and cut at the potatuses
to get them up. Her back was turned to the house, and the tall stalks
and thick leaves of the tomato bushes quite hid it from her view when
she sat on the ground, for she was a teeny-tawny little old woman. While
she was thus engaged, the little old man was sitting inside with the
book open in one hand, for fear he should forget the charm, and the
fairy foxglove tight in the other, waiting impatiently for her return.
The hands of the clock kept getting nearer and nearer to twelve, and at
last there was only one moment wanting to the time.

"Why, goodness gracious me!" cried Mr. Timmy Timmens; "has Polly forgot
all about the fairy wish? I declare, I have a great mind to begin
alone." Just as he said these words, the clock began to strike! and at
the same moment a tremendous hullabaloo arose on the road. "There come
the fairies!" squeaked the little old man; and without waiting another
second, he stood straight up in the middle of the floor, and said, in a
trembling voice:

          "Rorum corum torum snorum,
           Highcum tickleme cockolorum!"

seven times over; then, shutting up his eyes as tight as possible, stood
on one leg, and cried, "Please, good fairy, Polly and I wish our house
was in the middle of the village!"

Hardly had he said these words, than a long red object, that looked
wonderfully like a cow's tail, suddenly whisked in at the half open
door; the wind caught the door, and shut it to, slam! bang! and with a
jerk that made the bright brass knocker give a tremendous double knock
on the bright blue door, and sent the bright tin saucepans scattering in
every direction, the house started suddenly down on the road on a
double-quick trot! Did you EVER?! Well, I NEVER did!!

It happened that a large drove of cows and oxen were going down to
market that day, and being very hot, and tired, and thirsty, they
naturally objected to being driven in that way any longer, and commenced
cutting a variety of capers that were enough to frighten you out of
your wits. At last one irascible little bull, who had been riding on the
other ones' backs, charging at all the innocent ducks, geese, and pigs
he could find on the road, and finally had tossed one of the men who
were driving him right up in the air, dashed on ahead, and, seeing the
little house with the bright red sides, took the color as a personal
insult to himself. Down went his head and up went his heels, and in
another minute he would have bounced right into poor Mr. Timmy Timmens'
dwelling, when one of the drivers saw him, and rushing up, gave him a
good whack with his whip. Master Bull turned round to see what was to
pay; in an instant his tail was caught in the door as I told you,
and, frightened half out of his wits, he galloped off, dragging the
little house on wheels after him, and roaring with pain, while the
drivers looked on, roaring with laughter.

[Illustration: THE MAD BULL.]

Meanwhile, the little old man remained standing on one leg, not daring
to open his eyes, for fear the charm would be broken, and only wishing
that the little old woman were with him. At last the house stopped,
moving with another jerk, that sent the little old man toppling back in
his rocking chair, and a moment afterward the door was opened a little
bit, and a strange voice said, "Well, here we are at the village, old
gentleman, begging your pardon," and then all was silent.

Up jumped the little old man, opening his eyes very wide this time,
hobbled to the door, and looked out. There, sure enough, he was, in the
pleasant, shady village street, with the church directly opposite, so
nice for Sundays, and nothing to be seen but a drove of cows and oxen
going down the road at some distance!

"Well, was there ever anything known like this?" cried Mr. Timmy
Timmens. "If this isn't the most wonderful fairy doings I ever heard of!
I must go right off to find Polly, and tell her the happy news."

So saying, he went down the bright yellow steps, carefully shut the
bright blue door behind him, and toddled off as fast as he could to the
common.

Now the little old woman, before she had finished digging up the
potatuses, found the sun very warm and herself very sleepy, and thinking
her husband would be sure to call her when twelve o'clock came, she just
got under the shade of the tomatuses, and went off in a nice nap. When
she woke, she jumped up in a hurry, exclaiming, "Why, bless me--how
could I have forgotten about twelve o'clock? I must make haste into the
house this minute." But where was the house? The little old woman stared
all around until she nearly stared her eyes out, but it was nowhere to
be seen.

"Why, my goodness gracious, stars, and what's-his-names!" squealed the
little old woman, letting fall her knife and basket; "where has the
house runned to? Timmy must have tried the fairy charm without ever
telling me! I mean to go right to the village and see if it is there."

So she gathered up her basket and knife, stuffed the basket, and her
apron, and her pockets with all the vegetables she could carry, and
started off for the village. Before she was half way there, however, she
met her husband. "Where is it?" "There it is!" they called at the same
moment, and falling into each other's arms and a mud puddle, they stood
for a long time, saying by turns: "Did you ever?" "No, I never!" "Would
you believe it?" "Not 'less I see'd it!" and then they took hold of
hands and trotted off to the little house that ran on wheels.

There they found it, all high and dry, under a big apple tree, looking
as nice as ninepence. With joyful hearts they hurried inside, picked up
the saucepans, and cooked all the tomatuses and potatuses for dinner,
with an apple dumpling for dessert, made of some of the apples that had
fallen off the tree; and after that, the little old man and the little
old woman, and the bright green blinds, and the bright red walls, and
the bright blue door with the bright brass knocker, and the bright
yellow steps, all lived in peace and the middle of the village,
believing more firmly than ever in the existence of fairies, and never
doubting that their house had been moved solely by the miraculous power
of the fairy spell,

          "Rorum corum torum snorum,
           Highcum tickleme cockolorum!"

And if they're not dead they live there still! Don't you believe it?
Well I NEVER did!



          THE END OF THE FOURTH BOOK.


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Note:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page 18, the indentation of the third line on the stanza that begins, "I
can go, on busy feet" was adjusted to match the rest of the poem's
layout. The original looked like:

               "I can go, on busy feet,
                 Errands for her all day through;
          Work for her, I feel, is sweet--
                 This can 'ittle Luly do!

Page 50, "_himed" changed to "chimed" (chimed both the little)

Page 68, "barege" changed to "barege" (barege dress, trimmed)

Page 74, there is a closing quote after Mrs. Montague speaks.
Although there is no opening quote, the closing quote indicates that
she's no longer speaking so it was retained.

Page 76, "acommodated" changed to "accomodated" (Miss Morris was
accomodated)

Page 104, "litle" changed to "little" (little old tea tray)

Page 105, "throught" changed to "through" (through the wall)







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Funny Little Socks, by Sarah. L. Barrow

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FUNNY LITTLE SOCKS ***

***** This file should be named 29595.txt or 29595.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/5/9/29595/

Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
