The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Unveiling of Lhasa, by Edmund Candler

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Unveiling of Lhasa

Author: Edmund Candler

Release Date: August 6, 2010 [EBook #33359]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UNVEILING OF LHASA ***




Produced by Steven Gibbs, Asad Razzaki and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Transcriber's Note:


  Variations in spelling and hyphenation have been retained as in
    the original.

  Some typographical and punctuation errors have been corrected. A
    complete list follows the text.

  Words italicized in the original are surrounded by _underscores_.

  The 'oe' ligature is represented as oe.




              THE UNVEILING
                OF LHASA

                   BY

             EDMUND CANDLER

      AUTHOR OF 'A VAGABOND IN ASIA'


       _WITH ILLUSTRATIONS AND MAP_

                 LONDON
              EDWARD ARNOLD
      Publisher to H.M. India Office
  41 & 43 MADDOX STREET, BOND STREET, W.
                  1905
          [_All rights reserved_]




                    THESE PAGES,
     WRITTEN MOSTLY IN THE DRY COLD WIND OF TIBET,
  OFTEN WHEN INK WAS FROZEN AND ONE'S HAND TOO NUMBED
          TO FEEL A PEN, ARE DEDICATED TO

               COLONEL HOGGE, C.B.,

                       AND

         THE OFFICERS OF THE 23RD SIKH PIONEERS,
   WHOSE GENIAL SOCIETY IS ONE OF THE MOST PLEASANT
            MEMORIES OF A RIGOROUS CAMPAIGN.




PREFACE


The recent expedition to Lhasa was full of interest, not only on account
of the political issues involved and the physical difficulties overcome,
but owing to the many dramatic incidents which attended the Mission's
progress. It was my good fortune to witness nearly all these stirring
events, and I have written the following narrative of what I saw in the
hope that a continuous story of the affair may interest readers who have
hitherto been able to form an idea of it only from the telegrams in the
daily Press. The greater part of the book was written on the spot, while
the impressions of events and scenery were still fresh. Owing to wounds
I was not present at the bombardment and relief of Gyantse, but this
phase of the operations is dealt with by Mr. Henry Newman, _Reuter's_
correspondent, who was an eye-witness. I am especially indebted to him
for his account, which was written in Lhasa, and occupied many mornings
that might have been devoted to well-earned rest.

My thanks are also due to the Proprietors of the _Daily Mail_ for
permission to use material of which they hold the copyright; and I am
indebted to the Editors of the _Graphic_ and _Black and White_ for
allowing me to reproduce certain photographs by Lieutenant Bailey.

The illustrations are from sketches by Lieutenant Rybot, and photographs
by Lieutenants Bailey, Bethell, and Lewis, to whom I owe my cordial
thanks.

                                                    EDMUND CANDLER.

        LONDON,
    _January, 1905._




CONTENTS


CHAPTER I

THE CAUSES OF THE EXPEDITION

PAGES

  A retrospect--Early visitors to Lhasa--The Jesuits--The
      Capuchins--Van der Putte--Thomas Manning--The Lazarist
      fathers--Policy of exclusion due to Chinese
      influence--The Nepalese invasion--Bogle and Turner--The
      Macaulay Mission--Tibetans invade Indian territory--The
      expedition of 1888--The convention with China--British
      blundering--Our treatment of the Shata Shape--The
      Yatung trade mart--Tibetans repudiate the
      convention--Fiction of the Chinese suzerainty--A policy
      of drift--Tibetan Mission to the Czar--Dorjieff and his
      intrigues--The Dalai Lama and Russian designs--Our
      great countermove--Boycotted at Khamba Jong--The
      advance sanctioned--Winter quarters at Tuna               1-21

CHAPTER II

OVER THE FRONTIER

  From the base to Gnatong--A race to Chumbi--A perilous
      night ride--Forest scenery--Gnatong three years ago and
      now--Gnatong in action--A mountain lake--The Jelap la
      and beyond--Undefended barriers--Yatung and its Customs
      House--Chumbi--The first Press message from
      Tibet--Arctic clothing--Scenes in camp--A very
      uncomfortable 'picnic'                                   22-34

CHAPTER III

THE CHUMBI VALLEY

  The Tomos--A hardy race--Their habits and
      diversions--Chinamen in exile--A prosperous valley--But
      a cheerless clime--Kasi and his statistics--Trade
      figures--Tibetan cruelties--Kasi as general
      provider--Mountain scenery--The spirit of the
      Himalayas--A glorious flora--The Himalayas and the
      Alps--The wall of Gob-sorg--Chinamen and Tomos--A
      future hill-station--Lingmathang--A cosy cave--The
      Mounted Infantry Corps--Two famous regiments--Sport at
      Lingmathang--The Sikkim stag--Gamebirds and
      wildfowl--Gautsa camp                                    35-61

CHAPTER IV

PHARI JONG

  Gautsa to Phari Jong--A wonderful old fortress--Tibetan
      dirt--A medical armoury--The Lamas' library--Roadmaking
      and sport--The Tibetan gazelle and other
      animals--Evening diversions--Cold, grime, and
      misery--Manning's journal--Bogle's account of
      Phari--History of the fortress--The town and its
      occupants--The mystery of Tibet--The significance of
      the frescoes--Departure from Phari--The monastery of
      the Red Lamas--Chumulari--The Tibetan New Year--Bogle's
      narrative--The Tang la and the road to Lhasa             62-82

CHAPTER V

THE ROAD AND TRANSPORT

  A transport 'show'--Difficulties of the way--Vicissitudes
      of climate--Frozen heights and sweltering
      valleys--Disease amongst transport animals--A tale of
      disaster--The stricken Yak Corps--Troubles of the
      transport officer--Mules to the rescue--The coolie
      transport corps--Carrying power of the transport
      items--The problem and its solution--The ekka and the
      yak--A providentially ascetic beast--Splendid work of
      the transport service--Courage and endurance of
      officers and men--The 12th Mule Corps benighted in a
      blizzard--Rifle-bolts and Maxims
      frost-jammed--Difficulties of a Russian advance on
      Lhasa--The new Ammo Chu cart-road                        83-98

CHAPTER VI

THE ACTION AT THE HOT SPRINGS

  The deadlock at Tuna--Discomforts of the garrison--The
      Lamas' curse--The attitude of Bhutan--A diplomatic
      triumph--Tedious delays--A welcome move forward--The
      Tibetan camp at Hot Springs--The Lhasa Depon meets
      Colonel Younghusband--Futile conferences--The Tibetan
      position surrounded--Coolness of the Sikhs and
      Gurkhas--The disarming--A sudden outbreak--A desperate
      struggle--The action of the Lhasa General--The rabble
      disillusioned in their gods--A beaten and bewildered
      enemy--Reflections after the event--Tibetans in
      hospital--Three months afterwards                       99-114

CHAPTER VII

A HUMAN MISCELLANY

  In a doolie to the base--Tibetan bearers--A retrospect--A
      reverie and a reminiscence--Snow-bound at Phari--The
      Bhutia as bearer--The Lepchas and their
      humours--Mongolian odours--The road at last--Platitudes
      in epigram--Lucknow doolie-wallahs--Their hymn of the
      obvious--Meetings on the road--A motley of
      races--Through a tropical forest--The Tista and
      civilization                                           115-126

CHAPTER VIII

THE ADVANCE OF THE MISSION OPPOSED

  The Tibetans responsible for hostilities--Their version of
      the Hot Springs affair--Treacherous attack at
      Samando--Wall-building--The Red Idol Gorge action--A
      stiff climb--The enemy outflanked--Impressed
      peasants--First phase of the opposition--Bad
      generalship--Lack of enterprise--Erratic shooting--All
      quiet at Gyantse--Enemy occupy Karo la--A booby
      trap--Colonel Brander's sortie--Frontal attack
      repulsed--Captain Bethune killed--Failure of flanking
      movement--A critical moment--Sikhs turn the
      position--Flight and pursuit--Second phase of the
      opposition--Advanced tactics--Danger of being cut
      off--The attack on Kangma--Desperate gallantry of the
      enemy--Patriots or fanatics?                           127-151

CHAPTER IX

GYANTSE (BY HENRY NEWMAN)

  A happy valley--Devastated by war--Why the Jong was
      evacuated--The lull before the storm--Tibetans
      massing--The attack on the mission--A hot ten
      minutes--Pyjamaed warriors--Wounded to the rescue--The
      Gurkhas' rally--The camp bombarded--The labour of
      defence work--Hadow's Maxim--Life during the
      siege--Tibetans reinforced--They enfilade our
      position--The taking of the 'Gurkha Post'--Terrible
      carnage                                                152-169

CHAPTER X

GYANTSE--_continued_

  Attack on the postal riders--Brilliant exploit of the
      Mounted Infantry--Communications threatened--Clearing
      the villages--A narrow shave--Arrival of
      reinforcements--The storming of
      Palla--House-fighting--Capture of the post--A fantastic
      display--Night attacks--Seven miles of front--Advance
      of the relief column--The Tibetans cornered--Naini
      monastery taken--Capture of Tsaden--Our losses--The
      armistice--Tibetans refuse to surrender the Jong--A
      bristling fortress--The attack at dawn--The
      breach--Gallantry of Lieutenant Grant and his
      Gurkhas--Capture of the Jong                           170-194

CHAPTER XI

GOSSIP ON THE ROAD TO THE FRONT

  A garden in the forest--A jeremiad on transport--The
      servant question--Jung Bir--British
      Bhutan--Kalimpong--'The Bhutia tat'--Father
      Desgodins--An adventurous career--A lost
      opportunity--Chinese duplicity--Phuntshog--New arms and
      new friends for Tibet--A mysterious Lama--Dorjieff
      again--The inscrutable Tibetan                         195-206

CHAPTER XII

TO THE GREAT RIVER

  Failure of peace negociations--Opposition expected--Details
      of force--March to the Karo la--Villages deserted--The
      second Karo la action--The Gurkhas' climb--The Tibetan
      rout--The Kham prisoners--Hopelessness of the Tibetans'
      struggle--Their troops disheartened--Arrival at
      Nagartse--Tedious delegates--The victory of a
      personality--Brush with Tibetan cavalry--The last
      shot--The Shapes despoiled--Modern rifles--Exaggerated
      reports of Russian assistance--The Yamdok Tso--Dorje
      Phagmo--Legends of the lake--The incubus of an
      army--Why men travel--Wildfowl--Pehte--View from the
      Khamba Pass--From the desert to Arcadia--The Tibetan of
      the tablelands--The Tuna plateau--Homely scenes--A mood
      of indolence--The course of the Tsangpo--The
      Brahmaputra Irawaddy controversy--The projected Tsangpo
      trip--Legendary geography--Lost opportunities          207-238

CHAPTER XIII

LHASA AND ITS VANISHED DEITY

  The passage of the river--Major Bretherton drowned--The Kyi
      Chu valley--Tropical heat--Atisa's tomb--Foraging in
      holy places--First sight of the Potala--Hidden
      Lhasa--Symbols of remonstrance--Prophecies of
      invasion--And decay of Buddhism--Medieval
      Tibet--Spiritual terrorism--Lamas' fears of
      enlightenment--The last mystery unveiled--Arrival at
      Lhasa--View from the Chagpo Ri--Entry into the
      city--Apathy of the people--The Potala--Magnificence
      and squalor--The secret of romance--A vanished
      deity--'Thou shalt not kill'--Secret assassinations--A
      marvellous disappearance--The Dalai Lama joins
      Dorjieff--His personality and character--The verdict of
      the Nepalese Resident--The voice without a soul--The
      wisdom of his flight--A romantic picture--The place of
      the dead                                               239-264

CHAPTER XIV

THE CITY AND ITS TEMPLES

  Sullen monks--A Lama runs amok--The environs of Lhasa--The
      Lingkhor--The Ragyabas--The cathedral--Service before
      the Great Buddhas--The Lamas' chant--Vessels of
      gold--'Hell'--White mice--The many-handed
      Buddha--Silence and abstraction--The bazaar--Hats--The
      Mongolians--Curio-hunting--The Ramo-che--Sorcery--The
      adventures of a soul--Lamaism and Roman
      Catholicism--The decay of Buddhism--The three great
      monasteries--Their political influence--Depung--An
      ecclesiastical University--The 'impossible' Tibetan--An
      ultimatum--Consternation at Depung--Temporizing and
      evasion--An ugly mob--A political deadlock             265-285

CHAPTER XV

THE SETTLEMENT

  An irresponsible administration--An insolent reply--Tibetan
      haggling--Release of the Lachung men--Social relations
      with the Tibetans--A guarded ultimatum--A diplomatic
      triumph--The signing of the treaty--Colonel
      Younghusband's speech--The terms--Political prisoners
      liberated--Deposition of the Dalai Lama--The Tashe
      Lama--Prospect of an Anglophile Pope--The practical
      results of the expedition--Russia discredited--Why a
      Resident should be left at Lhasa--China hesitates to
      sign the Treaty--The 'vicious circle' again--Her
      acquiescence not of vital importance--The attitude of
      Tibet to Great Britain--Fear and respect the only
      guarantee of future good conduct                       286-304




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


  A COLD DAY IN TIBET                                     _frontispiece_

  HEADQUARTERS OF THE MISSION AT LHASA                  _to face p._   6

  CHORTEN                                                     "       12

  PANORAMA OF A CONVENT                                       "       12

  TUNA VILLAGE                                                "       20

  CHINESE GENERAL MA                                          "       30

  ON THE ROAD TO GAUTSA                                       "       30

  ROCK SCULPTURES                                                     41

  PRAYING-FLAGS AND MANI WALL                           _to face p._  54

  OFFICERS' TENTS, MOUNTED INFANTRY CAMP, LINGMATHANG         "       54

  SUBADAR SANGAT SINGH, 1ST MOUNTED INFANTRY                  "       60

  WOUNDED KYANG                                               "       70

  GOA, OR TIBETAN GAZELLE                                     "       70

  THE TANG LA                                                 "       76

  PHARI JONG                                                  "       76

  MOUNTED INFANTRY PONIES, TUNA CAMP                          "       94

  YAK IN EKKA                                                 "       94

  THE DEPON'S LAST CONFERENCE WITH COLONEL YOUNGHUSBAND _to face p._ 102

  TIBETANS RETREATING FROM SANGARS                            "      106

  TURNING TIBETANS OUT OF THE SANGARS ON THE HILLSIDE         "      106

  DIAGRAMMATIC VIEW OF HOT SPRINGS ACTION                     "      110

  THE TIBETAN DEAD                                            "      118

  FIELD-HOSPITAL DOOLIE WITH TIBETAN BEARERS                  "      118

  TIBETAN SOLDIERS                                            "      124

  WOUNDED TIBETAN                                             "      130

  WOUNDED TIBETAN IN BRITISH HOSPITAL                         "      130

  PIONEERS DESTROYING KANGMA WALL                             "      142

  GYANTSE JONG                                                "      154

  GOLDEN-ROOFED TEMPLE, GYANTSE                               "      182

  BUDDHAS IN PALKHOR CHOIDE                                   "      182

  TSACHEN MONASTERY                                           "      198

  GROUP OF SHAPES PARLEYING                                   "      198

  SKETCH OF THE KARO LA                                              213

  KHAM PRISONERS                                        _to face p._ 214

  GURKHAS CLIMBING AT THE KARO LA                             "      214

  PEHTE JONG                                                  "      222

  GUBCHI JONG                                                 "      230

  OLD CHAIN-BRIDGE AT CHAKSAM                                 "      236

  CROSSING THE TSANGPO                                        "      236

  THE POTALA                                                  "      244

  ENTRY INTO LHASA                                            "      250

  CORNER OF COURTYARD OF ASTROLOGER'S TEMPLE, NECHANG   _to face p._ 250

  THE POTALA, WEST FRONT                                      "      260

  MOUNTED INFANTRY GUARD AT THE POTALA                        "      260

  METAL BOWLS OUTSIDE THE JOKHANG                             "      268

  STREET SCENE IN LHASA                                       "      268

  THE TSARUNG SHAPE                                           "      274

  MONGOLIANS IN LHASA                                         "      274

  THE TA LAMA                                                 "      286

  SOLDIER OF THE AMBAN'S ESCORT                               "      286

  COLONEL YOUNGHUSBAND AND THE AMBAN AT THE RACES             "      290

  THE TSARUNG SHAPE AND THE SECHUNG SHAPE LEAVING
      LHALU HOUSE AFTER THE DURBAR                      _to face p._ 294

  TIBETAN DRAMA PLAYED IN THE COURTYARD OF LHALU HOUSE        "      298




THE UNVEILING OF LHASA




CHAPTER I

THE CAUSES OF THE EXPEDITION


The conduct of Great Britain in her relations with Tibet puts me in mind
of the dilemma of a big boy at school who submits to the attacks of a
precocious youngster rather than incur the imputation of 'bully.' At
last the situation becomes intolerable, and the big boy, bully if you
will, turns on the youth and administers the deserved thrashing. There
is naturally a good deal of remonstrance from spectators who have not
observed the byplay which led to the encounter. But sympathy must be
sacrificed to the restitution of fitting and respectful relations.

The aim of this record of an individual's impressions of the recent
Tibetan expedition is to convey some idea of the life we led in Tibet,
the scenes through which we passed, and the strange people we fought and
conquered. We killed several thousand of these brave, ill-armed men; and
as the story of the fighting is not always pleasant reading, I think it
right before describing the punitive side of the expedition to make it
quite clear that military operations were unavoidable--that we were
drawn into the vortex of war against our will by the folly and obstinacy
of the Tibetans.

The briefest review of the rebuffs Great Britain has submitted to during
the last twenty years will suffice to show that, so far from being to
blame in adopting punitive measures, she is open to the charge of
unpardonable weakness in allowing affairs to reach the crisis which made
such punishment necessary.

It must be remembered that Tibet has not always been closed to
strangers. The history of European travellers in Lhasa forms a
literature to itself. Until the end of the eighteenth century only
physical obstacles stood in the way of an entry to the capital. Jesuits
and Capuchins reached Lhasa, made long stays there, and were even
encouraged by the Tibetan Government. The first[1] Europeans to visit
the city and leave an authentic record of their journey were the Fathers
Grueber and d'Orville, who penetrated Tibet from China in 1661 by the
Sining route, and stayed in Lhasa two months. In 1715 the Jesuits
Desideri and Freyre reached Lhasa; Desideri stayed there thirteen years.
In 1719 arrived Horace de la Penna and the Capuchin Mission, who built
a chapel and a hospice, made several converts, and were not finally
expelled till 1740.[2] The Dutchman Van der Putte, first layman to
penetrate to the capital, arrived in 1720, and stayed there some years.
After this we have no record of a European reaching Lhasa until the
adventurous journey in 1811 of Thomas Manning, the first and only
Englishman to reach the city before this year. Manning arrived in the
retinue of a Chinese General whom he had met at Phari Jong, and whose
gratitude he had won for medical services. He remained in the capital
four months, and during his stay he made the acquaintance of several
Chinese and Tibetan officials, and was even presented to the Dalai Lama
himself. The influence of his patron, however, was not strong enough to
insure his safety in the city. He was warned that his life was
endangered, and returned to India by the same way he came. In 1846 the
Lazarist missionaries Huc and Gabet reached Lhasa in the disguise of
Lamas after eighteen months' wanderings through China and Mongolia,
during which they must have suffered as much from privations and
hardships as any travellers who have survived to tell the tale. They
were received kindly by the Amban and Regent, but permission to stay
was firmly refused them on the grounds that they were there to subvert
the religion of the State. Despite the attempts of several determined
travellers, none of whom got within a hundred miles of Lhasa, the
Lazarist fathers were the last Europeans to set foot in the city until
Colonel Younghusband rode through the Pargo Kaling gate on August 4,
1904.

  [1] Friar Oderic of Portenone is supposed to have visited Lhasa in
      1325, but the authenticity of this record is open to doubt.

  [2] When in Lhasa I sought in vain for any trace of these buildings.
      The most enlightened Tibetans are ignorant, or pretend to be so,
      that Christian missionaries have resided in the city. In the
      cathedral, however, we found a bell with the inscription, 'TE
      DEUM LAUDAMUS,' which is probably a relic of the Capuchins.

The records of these travellers to Lhasa, and of others who visited
different parts of Tibet before the end of the eighteenth century, do
not point to any serious political obstacles to the admission of
strangers. Two centuries ago, Europeans might travel in remote parts of
Asia with greater safety than is possible to-day. Suspicions have
naturally increased with our encroachments, and the white man now
inspires fear where he used only to awake interest.[3]

  [3] Suspicion and jealousy of foreigners seems to have been the
      guiding principle both of Tibetans and Chinese even in the
      earlier history of the country. The attitude is well illustrated
      by a letter written in 1774 by the Regent at Lhasa to the Teshu
      Lama with reference to Bogle's mission: 'He had heard of two
      Fringies being arrived in the Deb Raja's dominions, with a great
      retinue of servants; that the Fringies were fond of war, and
      after insinuating themselves into a country raised disturbances
      and made themselves masters of it; that as no Fringies had ever
      been admitted into Tibet, he advised the Lama to find some method
      of sending them back, either on account of the violence of the
      small-pox or on any other pretence.'

The policy of strict exclusion in Tibet seems to have been synchronous
with Chinese ascendancy. At the end of the eighteenth century the
Nepalese invaded and overran the country. The Lamas turned to China for
help, and a force of 70,000 men was sent to their assistance. The
Chinese drove the Gurkhas over their frontier, and practically
annihilated their army within a day's march of Khatmandu. From this date
China has virtually or nominally ruled in Lhasa, and an important result
of her intervention has been to sow distrust of the British. She
represented that we had instigated the Nepalese invasion, and warned the
Lamas that the only way to obviate our designs on Tibet was to avoid all
communication with India, and keep the passes strictly closed to
foreigners.

Shortly before the Nepalese War, Warren Hastings had sent the two
missions of Bogle and Turner to Shigatze. Bogle was cordially received
by the Grand Teshu Lama, and an intimate friendship was established
between the two men. On his return to India he reported that the only
bar to a complete understanding with Tibet was the obstinacy of the
Regent and the Chinese agents at Lhasa, who were inspired by Peking. An
attempt was arranged to influence the Chinese Government in the matter,
but both Bogle and the Teshu Lama died before it could be carried out.
Ten years later Turner was despatched to Tibet, and received the same
welcome as his predecessor. Everything pointed to the continuance of a
steady and consistent policy by which the barrier of obstruction might
have been broken down. But Warren Hastings was recalled in 1785, and
Lord Cornwallis, the next Governor-General, took no steps to approach
and conciliate the Tibetans. It was in 1792 that the Tibetan-Nepalese
War broke out, which, owing to the misrepresentations of China,
precluded any possibility of an understanding between India and Tibet.
Such was the uncompromising spirit of the Lamas that, until Lord
Dufferin sanctioned the commercial mission of Mr. Colman Macaulay in
1886, no succeeding Viceroy after Warren Hastings thought it worth while
to renew the attempt to enter into friendly relations with the country.

The Macaulay Mission incident was the beginning of that weak and
abortive policy which lost us the respect of the Tibetans, and led to
the succession of affronts and indignities which made the recent
expedition to Lhasa inevitable. The escort had already advanced into
Sikkim, and Mr. Macaulay was about to join it, when orders were received
from Government for its return. The withdrawal was a concession to the
Chinese, with whom we were then engaged in the delimitation of the
Burmese frontier. This display of weakness incited the Tibetans to such
a pitch of vanity and insolence that they invaded our territory and
established a military post at Lingtu, only seventy miles from
Darjeeling.

We allowed the invaders to remain in the protected State of Sikkim two
years before we made any reprisal. In 1888, after several vain appeals
to China to use her influence to withdraw the Tibetan troops, we
reluctantly decided on a military expedition. The Tibetans were driven
from their position, defeated in three separate engagements, and pursued
over the frontier as far as Chumbi. We ought to have concluded a treaty
with them on the spot, when we were in a position to enforce it, but we
were afraid of offending the susceptibilities of China, whose suzerainty
over Tibet we still recognised, though she had acknowledged her
inability to restrain the Tibetans from invading our territory. At the
conclusion of the campaign, in which the Tibetans showed no military
instincts whatever, we returned to our post at Gnatong, on the Sikkim
frontier.

After two years of fruitless discussion, a convention was drawn up
between Great Britain and China, by which Great Britain's exclusive
control over the internal administration and foreign relations of Sikkim
was recognised, the Sikkim-Tibet boundary was defined, and both Powers
undertook to prevent acts of aggression from their respective sides of
the frontier. The questions of pasturage, trade facilities, and the
method in which official communications should be conducted between the
Government of India and the authorities at Lhasa were deferred for
future discussion. Nearly three more years passed before the trade
regulations were drawn up in Darjeeling--in December, 1903. The
negociations were characterized by the same shuffling and equivocation
on the part of the Chinese, and the same weak-kneed policy of
forbearance and conciliation on the part of the British. Treaty and
regulations were alike impotent, and our concessions went so far that we
exacted nothing as the fruit of our victory over the Tibetans--not even
a fraction of the cost of the campaign.

Our ignorance of the Tibetans, their Government, and their relations
with China was at this time so profound that we took our cue from the
Chinese, who always referred to the Lhasa authorities as 'the
barbarians.' The Shata Shape, the most influential of the four members
of Council, attended the negociations on behalf of the Tibetans. He was
officially ignored, and no one thought of asking him to attach his
signature to the treaty. The omission was a blunder of far-reaching
consequences. Had we realized that Chinese authority was practically
non-existent in Lhasa, and that the temporal affairs of Tibet were
mainly directed by the four Shapes and the Tsong-du (the very existence
of which, by the way, was unknown to us), we might have secured a
diplomatic agent in the Shata Shape who would have proved invaluable to
us in our future relations with the country. Unfortunately, during his
stay in Darjeeling the Shape's feelings were lacerated by ill-treatment
as well as neglect. In an unfortunate encounter with British youth,
which was said to have arisen from his jostling an English lady off the
path, he was taken by the scruff of the neck and ducked in the public
fountain. So he returned to Tibet with no love for the English, and
after certain courteous overtures from the agents of 'another Power,'
became a confirmed, though more or less accidental, Russophile. Though
deposed,[4] he has at the present moment a large following among the
monks of the Gaden monastery.

  [4] The Shata Shape and his three colleagues were deposed by the
      Dalai Lama in October, 1903.

In the regulations of 1893 it was stipulated that a trade mart should be
established at Yatung, a small hamlet six miles beyond our frontier. The
place is obviously unsuitable, situated as it is in a narrow pine-clad
ravine, where one can throw a stone from cliff to cliff across the
valley. No traders have ever resorted there, and the Tibetans have
studiously boycotted the place. To show their contempt for the treaty,
and their determination to ignore it, they built a wall a quarter of a
mile beyond the Customs House, through which no Tibetan or British
subject was allowed to pass, and, to nullify the object of the mart, a
tax of 10 per cent. on Indian goods was levied at Phari. Every attempt
was made by Sheng Tai, the late Amban, to induce the Tibetans to
substitute Phari for Yatung as a trade mart. But, as an official report
admits, 'it was found impossible to overcome their reluctance. Yatung
was eventually accepted both by the Chinese and British Governments as
the only alternative to breaking off the negociations altogether.' This
confession of weakness appears to me abject enough to quote as typical
of our attitude throughout. In deference to Tibetan wishes, we allowed
nearly every clause of the treaty to be separately stultified.

The Tibetans, as might be expected, met our forbearance by further
rebuffs. Not content with evading their treaty obligations in respect to
trade, they proceeded to overthrow our boundary pillars, violate grazing
rights, and erect guard-houses at Giagong, in Sikkim territory. When
called to question they repudiated the treaty, and said that it had
never been shown them by the Amban. It had not been sealed or confirmed
by any Tibetan representative, and they had no intention of observing
it.

Once more the 'solemn farce' was enacted of an appeal to China to use
her influence with the Lhasa authorities. And it was only after repeated
representations had been made by the Indian Government to the Secretary
of State that the Home Government realized the seriousness of the
situation, and the hopelessness of making any progress through the
agency of China. 'We seem,' said Lord Curzon, 'in respect to our policy
in Tibet, to be moving in a vicious circle. If we apply to Tibet we
either receive no reply or are referred to the Chinese Resident; if we
apply to the latter, he excuses his failure by his inability to put any
pressure upon Tibet.' In the famous despatch of January 8, 1903, the
Viceroy described the Chinese suzerainty as 'a political fiction,' only
maintained because of its convenience to both parties. China no doubt is
capable of sending sufficient troops to Lhasa to coerce the Tibetans.
But it has suited her book to maintain the present elusive and anomalous
relations with Tibet, which are a securer buttress to her western
dependencies against encroachment than the strongest army corps. For
many years we have been the butt of the Tibetans, and China their
stalking-horse.

The Tibetan attitude was clearly expressed by the Shigatze officials at
Khamba Jong in September last year, when they openly boasted that 'where
Chinese policy was in accordance with their own views they were ready
enough to accept the Amban's advice; but if this advice ran counter in
any respect to their national prejudices, the Chinese Emperor himself
would be powerless to influence them.' China has on several occasions
confessed her inability to coerce the Tibetans. She has proved herself
unable to enforce the observance of treaties or even to restrain her
subjects from invading our territory, and during the recent attempts at
negociations she had to admit that her representative in Lhasa was
officially ignored, and not even allowed transport to travel in the
country. In the face of these facts her exceedingly shadowy suzerainty
may be said to have entirely evaporated, and it is unreasonable to
expect us to continue our relations with Tibet through the medium of
Peking.

It was not until nine years after the signing of the convention that we
made any attempt to open direct communications with the Tibetans
themselves. It is astonishing that we allowed ourselves to be hoodwinked
so long. But this policy of drift and waiting is characteristic of our
foreign relations all over the world. British Cabinets seem to believe
that cure is better than prevention, and when faced by a dilemma have
seldom been known to act on the initiative, or take any decided course
until the very existence of their dependency is imperilled.

In 1901 Lord Curzon was permitted to send a despatch to the Dalai Lama
in which it was pointed out that his Government had consistently defied
and ignored treaty rights; and in view of the continued occupation of
British territory, the destruction of frontier pillars, and the
restrictions imposed on Indian trade, we should be compelled to resort
to more practical measures to enforce the observance of the treaty,
should he remain obstinate in his refusal to enter into friendly
relations. The letter was returned unopened, with the verbal excuse that
the Chinese did not permit him to receive communications from any
foreign Power. Yet so great was our reluctance to resort to military
coercion that we might even at this point have let things drift, and
submitted to the rebuffs of these impossible Tibetans, had not the
Dalai Lama chosen this moment for publicly flaunting his relations with
Russia.

The second[5] Tibetan Mission reached St. Petersburg in June, 1901,
carrying autograph letters and presents to the Czar from the Dalai Lama.
Count Lamsdorff declared that the mission had no political significance
whatever. We were asked to believe that these Lamas travelled many
thousand miles to convey a letter that expressed the hope that the
Russian Foreign Minister was in good health and prosperous, and informed
him that the Dalai Lama was happy to be able to say that he himself
enjoyed excellent health.

  [5] A previous mission had been received by the Czar at Livadia in
      October, 1900.

It is possible that the mission to St. Petersburg was of a purely
religious character, and that there was no secret understanding at the
time between the Lhasa authorities and Russia. Yet the fact that the
mission was despatched in direct contradiction to the national policy of
isolation that had been respected for over a century, and at a time when
the Tibetans were aware of impending British activity to exact
fulfilment of the treaty obligations so long ignored by them, points to
some secret influence working in Lhasa in favour of Russia, and opposed
to British interests. The process of Russification that has been carried
on with such marked success in Persia and Turkestan, Merv and Bokhara,
was being applied in Tibet. It has long been known to our Intelligence
Department that certain Buriat Lamas, subjects of the Czar, and educated
in Russia, have been acting as intermediaries between Lhasa and St.
Petersburg. The chief of these, one Dorjieff, headed the so-called
religious mission of 1901, and has been employed more than once as the
Dalai Lama's ambassador to St. Petersburg. Dorjieff is a man of
fifty-eight, who has spent some twenty years of his life in Lhasa, and
is known to be the right-hand adviser of the Dalai Lama. No doubt
Dorjieff played on the fears of the Buddhist Pope until he really
believed that Tibet was in danger of an invasion from India, in which
eventuality the Czar, the great Pan-Buddhist Protector, would descend on
the British and drive them back over the frontier. The Lamas of Tibet
imagine that Russia is a Buddhist country, and this belief has been
fostered by adventurers like Dorjieff, Tsibikoff, and others, who have
inspired dreams of a consolidated Buddhist church under the spiritual
control of the Dalai Lama and the military aegis of the Czar of All the
Russias.

These dreams, full of political menace to ourselves, have, I think, been
dispelled by Lord Curzon's timely expedition to Lhasa. The presence of
the British in the capital and the helplessness of Russia to lend any
aid in such a crisis are facts convincing enough to stultify the effects
of Russian intrigue in Buddhist Central Asia during the last
half-century.

The fact that the first Dalai Lama who has been allowed to reach
maturity has plunged his country into war by intrigue with a foreign
Power proves the astuteness of the cold-blooded policy of removing the
infant Pope, and the investiture of power in the hands of a Regent
inspired by Peking. It is believed that the present Dalai Lama was
permitted to come of age in order to throw off the Chinese yoke. This
aim has been secured, but it has involved other issues that the Lamas
could not foresee.

And here it must be observed that the Dalai Lama's inclination towards
Russia does not represent any considerable national movement. The desire
for a rapprochement was largely a matter of personal ambition inspired
by that arch-intriguer Dorjieff, whose ascendancy over the Dalai Lama
was proved beyond a doubt when the latter joined him in his flight to
Mongolia on hearing the news of the British advance on Lhasa. Dorjieff
had a certain amount of popularity with the priest population of the
capital, and the monks of the three great monasteries, amongst whom he
is known to have distributed largess royally. But the traditional policy
of isolation is so inveterately ingrained in the Tibetan character that
it is doubtful if he could have organized a popular party of any
strength.

It may be asked, then, What is, or was, the nature of the Russian menace
in Tibet? It is true that a Russian invasion on the North-East frontier
is out of the question. For to reach the Indian passes the Russians
would have to traverse nearly 1,500 miles of almost uninhabited country,
presenting difficulties as great as any we had to contend with during
the recent campaign. But the establishment of Russian influence in Lhasa
might mean military danger of another kind. It would be easy for her to
stir up the Tibetans, spread disaffection among the Bhutanese, send
secret agents into Nepal, and generally undermine our prestige. Her aim
would be to create a diversion on the Tibet frontier at any time she
might have designs on the North-West. The pioneers of the movement had
begun their work. They were men of the usual type--astute, insidious, to
be disavowed in case of premature discovery, or publicly flaunted when
they had prepared any ground on which to stand.

Our countermove--the Tibet Expedition--must have been a crushing and
unexpected blow to Russia. For the first time in modern history Great
Britain had taken a decisive, almost high-handed, step to obviate a
danger that was far from imminent. We had all the best cards in our
hands. Russia's designs in Lhasa became obvious at a time when we could
point to open defiance on the part of the Tibetans, and provocation such
as would have goaded any other European nation to a punitive expedition
years before. We could go to Lhasa, apparently without a thought of
Russia, and yet undo all the effects of her scheming there, and deal
her prestige a blow that would be felt throughout the whole of Central
Asia. Such was Lord Curzon's policy. It was adopted in a half-hearted
way by the Home Government, and eventually forced on them by the conduct
of the Tibetans themselves. Needless to say, the discovery of Russian
designs was the real and prime cause of the despatch of the mission,
while Tibet's violation of treaty rights and refusal to enter into any
relations with us were convenient as ostensible motives. It cannot be
denied that these grievances were valid enough to justify the strongest
measures.

In June, 1903, came the announcement of Colonel Younghusband's mission
to Khamba Jong. I do not think that the Indian Government ever expected
that the Tibetans would come to any agreement with us at Khamba Jong. It
is to their credit that they waited patiently several months in order to
give them every chance of settling things amicably. However, as might
have been expected, the Commission was boycotted. Irresponsible
delegates of inferior rank were sent by the Tibetans and Chinese, and
the Lhasa delegates, after some fruitless parleyings, shut themselves up
in the fort, and declined all intercourse, official or social, with the
Commissioners.[6]

  [6] Their attitude was thus summed up by Captain O'Connor, secretary
      to the mission: 'We cannot accept letters; we cannot write
      letters; we cannot let you into our zone; we cannot let you
      travel; we cannot discuss matters, because this is not the proper
      place; go back to Giogong and send away all your soldiers, and we
      will come to an agreement' (Tibetan Blue-Book).

At the end of August news came that the Tibetans were arming. Colonel
Younghusband learnt that they had made up their minds to have no
negociations with us _inside_ Tibet. They had decided to leave us alone
at Khamba Jong, and to oppose us by force if we attempted to advance
further. They believed themselves fully equal to the English, and far
from our getting anything out of them, they thought that they would be
able to force something out of us. This is not surprising when we
consider the spirit of concession in which we had met them on previous
occasions.

At Khamba Jong the Commissioners were informed by Colonel Chao, the
Chinese delegate, that the Tibetans were relying on Russian assistance.
This was confirmed later at Guru by the Tibetan officials, who boasted
that if they were defeated they would fall back on another Power.

In September the Tibetans aggravated the situation by seizing and
beating at Shigatze two British subjects of the Lachung Valley in
Sikkim. These men were not restored to liberty until we had forced our
way to Lhasa and demanded their liberation, twelve months afterwards.

The mission remained in its ignominious position at Khamba Jong until
its recall in November. Almost at the same time the expedition to
Gyantse was announced.[7]

  [7] The situation was thus eloquently summarized by the Government of
      India in a despatch to Mr. Brodrick, November 5, 1903: 'It is not
      possible that the Tibet Government should be allowed to ignore
      its treaty obligations, thwart trade, encroach upon our
      territory, destroy our boundary pillars, and refuse even to
      receive our communications. Still less do we think that when an
      amicable conference has been arranged for the settlement of these
      difficulties we should acquiesce in our mission being boycotted
      by the very persons who have been deputed to meet it, our
      officers insulted, our subjects arrested and ill-used, and our
      authority despised by a petty Power which only mistakes our
      forbearance for weakness, and which thinks that by an attitude of
      obstinate inertia it can once again compel us, as it has done in
      the past, to desist from our intentions.'

In the face of the gross and deliberate affront to which we had been
subjected at Khamba Jong it was now, of course, impossible to withdraw
from Tibetan territory until we had impressed on the Lamas the necessity
of meeting us in a reasonable spirit. It was clear that the Tibetans
meant fighting, and the escort had to be increased to 2,500 men. The
patience of Government was at last exhausted, and it was decided that
the mission was to proceed into Tibet, dictate terms to the Lamas, and,
if necessary, enforce compliance. The advance to Gyantse was sanctioned
in the first place. But it was quite expected that the obstinacy of the
Tibetans would make it necessary to push on to Lhasa.

Colonel Younghusband crossed the Jelap la into Tibet on December 13,
meeting with no opposition. Phari Jong was reached on the 20th, and the
fort surrendered without a shot being fired. Thence the mission
proceeded on January 7 across the Tang Pass, and took up its quarters on
the cold, wind-swept plateau of Tuna, at an elevation of 15,300 feet.
Here it remained for three months, while preparations were being made
for an advance in the spring. Four companies of the 23rd Pioneers, a
machine-gun section of the Norfolk Regiment, and twenty Madras sappers,
were left to garrison the place, and General Macdonald, with the
remainder of the force, returned to Chumbi for winter quarters. Chumbi
(10,060 feet) is well within the wood belt, but even here the
thermometer falls to 15 deg. below zero.

A more miserable place to winter in than Tuna cannot be imagined. But
for political reasons, it was inadvisable that the mission should spend
the winter in the Chumbi Valley, which is not geographically a part of
Tibet proper. A retrograde movement from Khamba Jong to Chumbi would be
interpreted by the Tibetans as a sign of yielding, and strengthen them
in their opinion that we had no serious intention of penetrating to
Gyantse.

With this brief account of the facts that led to the expedition I
abandon politics for the present, and in the succeeding chapters will
attempt to give a description of the Chumbi Valley, which, I believe,
was untrodden by any European before Colonel Younghusband's arrival in
December, 1903.

I was in India when I received permission to join the force. I took the
train to Darjeeling without losing a day, and rode into Chumbi in less
than forty-eight hours, reaching the British camp on January 10.




CHAPTER II

OVER THE FRONTIER


    CHUMBI,
      _January 13._

From Darjeeling to Lhasa is 380 miles. These, as in the dominions of
Namgay Doola's Raja, are mostly on end. The road crosses the Tibetan
frontier at the Jelap la (14,350 feet) eighty miles to the north-east.
From Observatory Hill in Darjeeling one looks over the bleak hog-backed
ranges of Sikkim to the snows. To the north and north-west lie
Kinchenjunga and the tremendous chain of mountains that embraces
Everest. To the north-east stretches a lower line of dazzling rifts and
spires, in which one can see a thin gray wedge, like a slice in a
Christmas cake. That is the Jelap. Beyond it lies Tibet.

There is a good military road from Siliguri, the base station in the
plains to Rungpo, forty-eight miles along the Teesta Valley. By
following the river-bed it avoids the two steep ascents to Kalimpong and
Ari. The new route saves at least a day, and conveys one to Rungli,
nearly seventy miles from the base, without compassing a single tedious
incline. It has also the advantage of being practicable for
bullock-carts and ekkas as far as Rungpo. After that the path is a
6-foot mule-track, at its best a rough, dusty incline, at its worst a
succession of broken rocks and frozen puddles, which give no foothold to
transport animals. From Rungpo the road skirts the stream for sixteen
miles to Rungli, along a fertile valley of some 2,000 feet, through
rice-fields and orange-groves and peaceful villages, now the scene of
military bustle and preparation. From Rungli it follows a winding
mountain torrent, whose banks are sometimes sheer precipitous crags.
Then it strikes up the mountain side, and becomes a ladder of stone
steps over which no animal in the world can make more than a mile and a
half an hour. From the valley to Gnatong is a climb of some 10,000 feet
without a break. The scenery is most magnificent, and I doubt if it is
possible to find anywhere in the same compass the characteristics of the
different zones of vegetation--from tropical to temperate, from
temperate to alpine--so beautifully exhibited.

At ordinary seasons transport is easy, and one can take the road in
comfort; but now every mule and pony in Sikkim and the Terai is employed
on the lines of communication, and one has to pay 300 rupees for an
animal of the most modest pretensions. It is reckoned eight days from
Darjeeling to Chumbi, but, riding all day and most of the night, I
completed the journey in two. Newspaper correspondents are proverbially
in a hurry. To send the first wire from Chumbi I had to leave my kit
behind, and ride with poshteen[8] and sleeping-bag tied to my saddle. I
was racing another correspondent. At Rungpo I found that he was five
hours ahead of me, but he rested on the road, and I had gained three
hours on him before he left the next stage at Rora Thang. Here I learnt
that he intended to camp at Lingtam, twelve miles further on, in a tent
lent him by a transport officer. I made up my mind to wait outside
Lingtam until it was dark, and then to steal a march on him unobserved.
But I believed no one. Wayside reports were probably intended to deceive
me, and no doubt my informant was his unconscious confederate.

  [8] Sheepskin.

Outside Rungli, six miles further on, I stopped at a little Bhutia's
hut, where he had been resting. They told me he had gone on only half an
hour before me. I loitered on the road, and passed Lingtam in the dark.
The moon did not rise till three, and riding in the dark was exciting.
At first the white dusty road showed clearly enough a few yards ahead,
but after passing Lingtam it became a narrow path cut out of a
thickly-wooded cliff above a torrent, a wall of rock on one side, a
precipice on the other. Here the darkness was intense. A white stone a
few yards ahead looked like the branch of a tree overhead. A dim
shapeless object to the left might be a house, a rock, a
bear--anything. Uphill and downhill could only be distinguished by the
angle of the saddle. Every now and then a firefly lit up the white
precipice an arm's-length to the right. Once when my pony stopped
panting with exhaustion I struck a match and found that we had come to a
sharp zigzag. Part of the revetment had fallen; there was a yard of
broken path covered with fern and bracken, then a drop of some hundred
feet to the torrent below. After that I led my beast for a mile until we
came to a charcoal-burner's hut. Two or three Bhutias were sitting round
a log fire, and I persuaded one to go in front of me with a lighted
brand. So we came to Sedongchen, where I left my beast dead beat, rested
a few hours, bought a good mule, and pressed on in the early morning by
moonlight. The road to Gnatong lies through a magnificent forest of oak
and chestnut. For five miles it is nothing but the ascent of stone steps
I have described. Then the rhododendron zone is reached, and one passes
through a forest of gnarled and twisted trunks, writhing and contorted
as if they had been thrust there for some penance. The place suggested a
scene from Dante's 'Inferno.' As I reached the saddle of Lingtu the moon
was paling, and the eastern sky-line became a faint violet screen. In a
few minutes Kinchenjunga and Kabru on the north-west caught the first
rays of the sun, and were suffused with the delicate rosy glow of dawn.

I reached Gnatong in time to breakfast with the 8th Gurkhas. The camp
lies in a little cleft in the hills at an elevation of 12,200 feet. When
I last visited the place I thought it one of the most desolate spots I
had seen. My first impressions were a wilderness of gray stones and
gray, uninhabited houses, felled tree-trunks denuded of bark, white and
spectral on the hillside. There was no life, no children's voices or
chattering women, no bazaar apparently, no dogs barking, not even a
pariah to greet you. If there was a sound of life it was the bray of
some discontented mule searching for stray blades of grass among the
stones. There were some fifty houses nearly all smokeless and vacant.
Some had been barracks at the time of the last Sikkim War, and of the
soldiers who inhabited them fifteen still lay in Gnatong in a little
gray cemetery, which was the first indication of the nearness of human
life. The inscriptions over the graves were all dated 1888, 1889, or
1890, and though but fourteen years had passed, many of them were barely
decipherable. The houses were scattered about promiscuously, with no
thought of neighbourliness or convenience, as though the people were
living there under protest, which was very probably the case. But the
place had its picturesque feature. You might mistake some of the houses
for tumbledown Swiss chalets of the poorer sort were it not for the
miniature fir-trees planted on the roofs, with their burdens of prayers
hanging from the branches like parcels on a Christmas-tree.

These were my impressions a year or two ago, but now Gnatong is all life
and bustle. In the bazaar a convoy of 300 mules was being loaded. The
place was crowded with Nepalese coolies and Tibetan drivers, picturesque
in their woollen knee-boots of red and green patterns, with a white star
at the foot, long russet cloaks bound tightly at the waist and bulging
out with cooking-utensils and changes of dress, embroidered caps of
every variety and description, as often as not tied to the head by a
wisp of hair. In Rotten Row--the inscription of 1889 still remains--I
met a subaltern with a pair of skates. He showed me to the mess-room,
where I enjoyed a warm breakfast and a good deal of chaff about
correspondents who 'were in such a devil of a hurry to get to a
God-forsaken hole where there wasn't going to be the ghost of a show.'

I left Gnatong early on a borrowed pony. A mile and a half from the camp
the road crosses the Tuko Pass, and one descends again for another two
miles to Kapup, a temporary transport stage. The path lies to the west
of the Bidang Tso, a beautiful lake with a moraine at the north-west
side. The mountains were strangely silent, and the only sound of wild
life was the whistling of the red-billed choughs, the commonest of the
_Corvidae_ at these heights. They were flying round and round the lake in
an unsettled manner, whistling querulously, as though in complaint at
the intrusion of their solitude.

I reached the Jelap soon after noon. No snow had fallen. The approach
was over broken rock and shale. At the summit was a row of cairns, from
which fluttered praying-flags and tattered bits of votive raiment.
Behind us and on both sides was a thin mist, but in front my eyes
explored a deep narrow valley bathed in sunshine. Here, then, was Tibet,
the forbidden, the mysterious. In the distance all the land was that
yellow and brick-dust colour I had often seen in pictures and thought
exaggerated and unreal. Far to the north-east Chumulari (23,930 feet),
with its magnificent white spire rising from the roof-like mass behind,
looked like an immense cathedral of snow. Far below on a yellow hillside
hung the Kanjut Lamasery above Rinchengong. In the valley beneath lay
Chumbi and the road to Lhasa.

There is a descent of over 4,000 feet in six miles from the summit of
the Jelap. The valley is perfectly straight, without a bend, so that one
can look down from the pass upon the Kanjut monastery on the hillside
immediately above Yatung. The pass would afford an impregnable military
position to a people with the rudiments of science and martial spirit. A
few riflemen on the cliffs that command it might annihilate a column
with perfect safety, and escape into Bhutan before any flanking movement
could be made. Yet miles of straggling convoy are allowed to pass daily
with the supplies that are necessary for the existence of the force
ahead. The road to Phari Jong passes through two military walls. The
first at Yatung, six miles below the pass, is a senseless obstruction,
and any able-bodied Tommy with hobnailed boots might very easily kick it
down. It has no block-houses, and would be useless against a flank
attack. Before our advance to Chumbi the wall was inhabited by three
Chinese officials, a dingpon, or Tibetan sergeant, and twenty Tibetan
soldiers. It served as a barrier beyond which no British subject was
allowed to pass. The second wall lies across the valley at Gob-sorg,
four miles beyond our camp at Chumbi. It is roofed and loop-holed like
the Yatung barrier, and is defended by block-houses. This fortification
and every mile of valley between the Jelap and Gautsa might be held by a
single company against an invading force. Yet there are not half a dozen
Chinese or Tibetan soldiers in the valley. No opposition is expected
this side of the Tang la, but nondescript troops armed with matchlocks
and bows hover round the mission on the open plateau beyond. Our
evacuation of Khamba Jong and occupation of Chumbi were so rapid and
unexpected that it is thought the Tibetans had no time to bring troops
into the valley; but to anyone who knows their strategical incompetence,
no explanation is necessary.

Yatung is reached by one of the worst sections of road on the march; one
comes across a dead transport mule at almost every zigzag of the
descent. For ten years the village has enjoyed the distinction of being
the only place in Southern Tibet accessible to Europeans. Not that many
Europeans avail themselves of its accessibility, for it is a dreary
enough place to live in, shrouded as it is in cloud more than half the
year round, and embedded in a valley so deep and narrow that in
winter-time the sun has hardly risen above one cliff when it sinks
behind another. The privilege of access to Yatung was the result of the
agreement between Great Britain and China with regard to trade
communications between India and Tibet drawn up in Darjeeling in 1893,
subsequently to the Sikkim Convention. It was then stipulated that there
should be a trade mart at Yatung to which British subjects should have
free access, and that there should be special trade facilities between
Sikkim and Tibet. It is reported that the Chinese Amban took good care
that Great Britain should not benefit by these new regulations, for
after signing the agreement which was to give the Indian tea-merchants a
market in Tibet, he introduced new regulations the other side of the
frontier, which prohibited the purchase of Indian tea. Whether the story
is true or not, it is certainly characteristic of the evasion and
duplicity which have brought about the present armed mission into Tibet.

To-day, as one rides through the cobbled street of Yatung, the only
visible effects of the Convention are the Chinese Customs House with its
single European officer, and the residence of a lady missionary, or
trader, as the exigencies of international diplomacy oblige her to term
herself. The Customs House, which was opened on May 1, 1894, was first
established with the object of estimating the trade between India and
Tibet--traffic is not permitted by any other route than the Jelap--and
with a view to taxation when the trade should make it worth while. It
was stipulated that no duties should be levied for the period of five
years. Up to the present no tariff has been imposed, and the only
apparent use the Customs House serves is to collect statistics, and
perhaps to remind Tibet of the shadowy suzerainty of China. The natives
have boycotted the place, and refuse to trade there, and no European or
native of India has thought it worth while to open a market. Phari is
the real trade mart on the frontier, and Kalimpong, in British Bhutan,
is the foreign trade mart. But the whole trade between India and Tibet
is on such a small scale that it might be in the hands of a single
merchant.

The Customs House, the missionary house, and the houses of the clerks
and servants of the Customs and of the headman, form a little block.
Beyond it there is a quarter of a mile of barren stony ground, and then
the wall with military pretensions. I rode through the gate
unchallenged.

At Rinchengong, a mile beyond the barrier, the Yatung stream flows into
the Ammo Chu. The road follows the eastern bank of the river, passing
through Cheuma and Old Chumbi, where it crosses the stream. After
crossing the bridge, a mile of almost level ground takes one into Chumbi
camp. I reached Chumbi on the evening of January 12, and was able to
send the _Daily Mail_ the first cable from Tibet, having completed the
journey from Darjeeling in two days' hard riding.

The camp lies in a shallow basin in the hills, and is flanked by brown
fir-clad hills which rise some 1,500 feet above the river-bed, and
preclude a view of the mountains on all sides. The situation is by no
means the best from the view of comfort, but strategic reasons make it
necessary, for if the camp were pitched half a mile further up the
valley, the gorge of the stream which debouches into the Ammo River to
the north of Chumbi would give the Tibetans an opportunity of attacking
us in the rear. Despite the protection of almost Arctic clothing, one
shivers until the sun rises over the eastern hill at ten o'clock, and
shivers again when it sinks behind the opposite one at three. Icy winds
sweep the valley, and hurricanes of dust invade one's tent. Against this
cold one clothes one's self in flannel vest and shirt, sweater,
flannel-lined coat, poshteen or Cashmere sheepskin, wool-lined Gilgit
boots, and fur or woollen cap with flaps meeting under the chin. The
general effect is barbaric and picturesque. In after-days the trimness
of a military club may recall the scene--officers clad in
gold-embroidered poshteen, yellow boots, and fur caps, bearded like
wild Kerghizes, and huddling round the camp fire in this black
cauldron-like valley under the stars.

Officers are settling down in Chumbi as comfortably as possible for
winter quarters. Primitive dens have been dug out of the ground, walled
up with boulders, and roofed in with green fir-branches. In some cases a
natural rock affords a whole wall. The den where I am now writing is
warmed by a cheerful pinewood blaze, a luxury after the _angeiti_ in
one's tent. I write at an operating-table after a dinner of minal
(pheasant) and yak's heart. A gramophone is dinning in my ears. It is
destined, I hope, to resound in the palace of Potala, where the Dalai
Lama and his suite may wonder what heathen ritual is accompanied by 'A
jovial monk am I,' and 'Her golden hair was hanging down her back.'

Both at home and in India one hears the Tibet Mission spoken of
enviously as a picnic. There is an idea of an encampment in a smiling
valley, and easy marches towards the mysterious city. In reality, there
is plenty of hard and uninteresting work. The expedition is attended
with all the discomforts of a campaign, and very little of the
excitement. Colonel Younghusband is now at Tuna, a desolate hamlet on
the Tibetan plateau, exposed to the coldest winds of Asia, where the
thermometer falls to 25 deg. below zero. Detachments of the escort are
scattered along the line of communications in places of varying cold
and discomfort, where they must wait until the necessary supplies have
been carried through to Phari. It is not likely that Colonel
Younghusband will be able to proceed to Gyantse before March. In the
meanwhile, imagine the Pioneers and Gurkhas, too cold to wash or shave,
shivering in a dirty Tibetan fort, half suffocated with smoke from a
yak-dung fire. Then there is the transport officer shut up in some
narrow valley of Sikkim, trying to make half a dozen out of three with
his camp of sick beasts and sheaf of urgent telegrams calling for
supplies. He hopes there will be 'a show,' and that he may be in it.
Certainly if anyone deserves to go to Lhasa and get a medal for it, it
is the supply and transport man. But he will be left behind.




CHAPTER III

THE CHUMBI VALLEY


    CHUMBI,
      _February, 1904._

The Chumbi Valley is inhabited by the Tomos, who are said to be
descendants of ancient cross-marriages between the Bhutanese and
Lepchas. They only intermarry among themselves, and speak a language
which would not be understood in other parts of Tibet. As no Tibetan
proper is allowed to pass the Yatung barrier, the Tomos have the
monopoly of the carrying trade between Phari and Kalimpong. They are
voluntarily under the protection of the Tibetans, who treat them
liberally, as the Lamas realize the danger of their geographical
position as a buffer state, and are shrewd enough to recognise that any
ill treatment or oppression would drive them to seek protection from the
Bhutanese or British.

The Tomos are merry people, hearty, and good-natured. They are
wonderfully hardy and enduring. In the coldest winter months, when the
thermometer is 20 deg. below zero, they will camp out at night in the snow,
forming a circle of their loads, and sleep contentedly inside with no
tent or roofing. The women would be comely if it were not for the cutch
that they smear over their faces. The practice is common to the Tibetans
and Bhutanese, but no satisfactory reason has been found for it. The
Jesuit Father, Johann Grueber, who visited Tibet in 1661, attributed the
custom to a religious whim:--'The women, out of a religious whim, never
wash, but daub themselves with a nasty kind of oil, which not only
causes them to stink intolerably, but renders them extremely ugly and
deformed.' A hundred and eighty years afterwards Huc noticed the same
habit, and attributed it to an edict issued by the Dalai Lama early in
the seventeenth century. 'The women of Tibet in those days were much
given to dress, and libertinage, and corrupted the Lamas to a degree to
bring their holy order into a bad repute.' The then Nome Khan (deputy of
the Dalai Lama), accordingly issued an order that the women should never
appear in public without smearing their faces with a black disfiguring
paste. Huc recorded that though the order was still obeyed, the practice
was observed without much benefit to morals. If you ask a Tomo or
Tibetan to-day why their women smear and daub themselves in this
unbecoming manner, they invariably reply, like the Mussulman or Hindu,
that it is custom. Mongolians do not bother themselves about causes.

The Tomo women wear a flat green distinctive cap, with a red badge in
the front, which harmonizes with their complexion--a coarse, brick red,
of which the primal ingredients are dirt and cutch, erroneously called
pig's blood, and the natural ruddiness of a healthy outdoor life in a
cold climate. A procession of these sirens is comely and picturesque--at
a hundred yards. They wrap themselves round and round with a thick
woollen blanket of pleasing colour and pattern, and wear on their feet
high woollen boots with leather or rope soles. If it was not for their
disfiguring toilet many of them would be handsome. The children are
generally pretty, and I have seen one or two that were really beautiful.
When we left a camp the villagers would generally get wind of it, and
come down for loot. Old newspapers, tins, bottles, string, and cardboard
boxes were treasured prizes. We threw these out of our cave, and the
children scrambled for them, and even the women made dives at anything
particularly tempting. My last impression of Lingmathang was a group of
women giggling and gesticulating over the fashion plates and
advertisements in a number of the _Lady_, which somebody's _memsahib_
had used for the packing of a ham.

The Tomos, though not naturally given to cleanliness, realize the
hygienic value of their hot springs. There are resorts in the
neighbourhood of Chumbi as fashionable as Homburg or Salsomaggiore;
mixed bathing is the rule, without costumes. These healthy folk are not
morbidly conscious of sex. The springs contain sulphur and iron, and
are undoubtedly efficacious. Where they are not hot enough, the Tomos
bake large boulders in the ashes of a log fire, and roll them into the
water to increase the temperature.

Tomos and Tibetans are fond of smoking. They dry the leaves of the wild
rhubarb, and mix them with tobacco leaves. The mixture is called
_dopta_, and was the favourite blend of the country. Now hundreds of
thousands of cheap American cigarettes are being introduced, and a
lucrative tobacco-trade has sprung up. Boxes of ten, which are sold at a
pice in Darjeeling, fetch an anna at Chumbi, and two annas at Phari.
Sahibs smoke them, sepoys smoke them, drivers and followers smoke them,
and the Tomo coolies smoke nothing else. Tibetan children of three
appreciate them hugely, and the road from Phari to Rungpo is literally
strewn with the empty boxes.

There is a considerable Chinese element in the Chumbi Valley--a frontier
officer, with the local rank of the Fourth Button, a colonel, clerks of
the Customs House, and troops numbering from one to two hundred. These,
of course, were not in evidence when we occupied the valley in December.
The Chinese are not accompanied by their wives, but take to themselves
women of the country, whose offspring people the so-called Chinese
villages. The pure Chinaman does not remain in the country after his
term of office. Life at Chumbi is the most tedious exile to him, and he
looks down on the Tomos as barbarous savages. He is as unhappy as a
Frenchman in Tonquin, cut off from all the diversions of social and
intellectual life. The frontier officer at Bibi-thang told me that he
had brought his wife with him, and the poor lady had never left the
house, but cried incessantly for China and civilization. Yet to the
uninitiated the Chinese villages of Gob-sorg and Bibi-thang might have
been taken from the far East and plumped down on the Indian frontier.
There is the same far-Eastern smell, the same doss-house, the same
hanging lamps, the same red lucky paper over the lintels of the doors,
and the same red and green abortions on the walls.

Much has been written and duly contradicted about the fertility of the
Chumbi Valley. If one does not expect orange-groves and rice-fields at
12,000 feet, it must be admitted that the valley is, relatively
speaking, fertile--that is to say, its produce is sufficient to support
its three or four thousand inhabitants.

The lower valley produces buckwheat, turnips, potatoes, radishes, and
barley. The latter, the staple food of the Tibetans, has, when ground,
an appetizing smell very like oatmeal. The upper valley is quite
sterile, and produces nothing but barley, which does not ripen; it is
gathered for fodder when green, and the straw is sold at high prices to
the merchants who visit Phari from Tibet and Bhutan. This year the
Tibetan merchants are afraid to come, and the commissariat benefits by
a very large supply of fodder which ought to see them through the
summer.

The idea that the valley is unusually fertile probably arose from the
well-to-do appearance of the natives of Rinchengong and Chumbi, and
their almost palatial houses, which give evidence of a prosperity due to
trade rather than agriculture.

The hillsides around Chumbi produce wild strawberries, raspberries,
currants, and cherries; but these are quite insipid in this sunless
climate.

The Chinese Custom's officer at Yatung tells me that the summer months,
though not hot, are relaxing and enervating. The thermometer never rises
above 70 deg.. The rainfall does not average quite 50 inches; but almost
daily at noon a mist creeps up from Bhutan, and a constant drizzle
falls. In June, July, and August, 1901, there were only three days
without rain.

At Phari I met a venerable old gentleman who gave me some statistics.
The old man, Katsak Kasi by name, was a Tibetan from the Kham province,
acting at Phari as trade agent for the Bhutanese Government. His face
was seared and parchment-like from long exposure to cold winds and rough
weather. His features were comparatively aquiline--that is to say, they
did not look as if they had been flattened out in youth. He wore a very
large pair of green spectacles, with a gold bulb at each end and a red
tassel in the middle, which gave him an air of wisdom and distinction.
He answered my rather inquisitive questions with courtesy and
decision, and yet with such a serious care for details that I felt quite
sure his figures must be accurate.

[Illustration: ROCK SCULPTURES.]

If statistics were any gauge of the benefits Indian trade would derive
from an open market with Tibet, the present mission, as far as
commercial interests are concerned, would be wasted. According to Kasi's
statistics, the cost of two dozen or thirty mules would balance the
whole of the annual revenue on Indian imports into the country. The idea
that duties are levied at the Yatung and Gob-sorg barriers is a mistake.
The only Customs House is at Phari, where the Indian and Bhutanese
trade-routes meet. The Customs are under the supervision of the two
jongpens, who send the revenue to Lhasa twice a year.

The annual income on imports from India, Kasi assured me, is only 6,000
rupees, whereas the income on exports amounts to 20,000. Tibetan trade
with India consists almost entirely of wool, yaks'-tails, and ponies.
There is a tax of 2 rupees 8 annas on ponies, 1 rupee a maund on wool,
and 1 rupee 8 annas a maund on yaks'-tails. Our imports into Tibet,
according to Kasi's statistics, are practically nil. Some piece goods,
iron vessels, and tobacco leaves find their way over the Jelap, but it
is a common sight to see mules returning into Tibet with nothing but
their drivers' cooking utensils and warm clothing.[9]

  [9] The only articles imported to the value of L1,000 are cotton
      goods, woollen cloths, metals, chinaware, coral, indigo, maize,
      silk, fur, and tobacco.

      The only exports to the value of L1,000 are musk, ponies, skins,
      wool, and yaks'-tails.

      Appended are the returns for the years 1895-1902:

        Year.  Value of Articles  Value of Articles  Total Value of
                 Imported into     Exported from     Imports and
                    Tibet.            Tibet.           Exports.
                     Rs.               Rs.                Rs.
        1895       416,218           634,086          1,050,304
        1896       561,395           781,269          1,342,664
        1897       674,139           820,300          1,494,436
        1898       718,475           817,851          1,536,326
        1899       962,637           822,760          1,785,397
        1900       730,502           710,012          1,440,514
        1901       734,075           783,480          1,517,555
        1902       761,837           805,338          1,567,075

      _Customs House Returns, Yatung._

At present no Indian tea passes Yatung. That none is sold at Phari
confirms the rumour I mentioned that the Chinese Amban, after signing
the trade regulations between India and Tibet in Darjeeling, 1893,
crossed the frontier to introduce new laws, virtually annulling the
regulations. Indian tea might be carried into Tibet, but not sold there.
Tibet has consistently broken all her promises and treaty obligations.
She has placed every obstacle in the way of Indian trade, and insulted
our Commissioners; yet the despatch of the present mission with its
armed escort has been called an act of aggression.

When I asked Kasi if the Tibetans would be angry with him for helping
us, he said they would certainly cut off his head if he remained in the
fort after we had left. There is some foundation in travellers' stories
about the punishment inflicted on the guards of the passes and other
officials who fail to prevent Europeans entering Tibet or pushing on
towards Lhasa.

Some Chumbi traders who were in Lhasa when we entered the valley are
still detained there, as far as I can gather, as hostages for the good
behaviour of their neighbours. In Tibet the punishment does not fit the
crime. The guards of a pass are punished for letting white men through,
quite irrespective of the opposing odds.

The commonest punishment in Tibet is flogging, but the ordeal is so
severe that it often proves fatal. I asked Kasi some questions about the
magisterial powers of the two jongpens, or district officers, who
remained in the fort some days after we occupied it. He told me that
they could not pass capital sentence, but they might flog the prisoners,
and if they died, nothing was said. Several victims have died of
flogging at Phari.

The natives in Darjeeling have a story of Tibetan methods, which have
always seemed to me the refinement of cruelty. At Gyantse, they say, the
criminal is flung into a dark pit, where he cannot tell whether it is
night or day. Cobras and scorpions and reptiles of various degrees of
venom are his companions; these he may hear in the darkness, for it is
still enough, and seek or avoid as he has courage. Food is sometimes
thrown in to tempt any faint-hearted wretch to prolong his agony. I
asked Kasi if there were any truth in the tale. He told me that there
were no venomous snakes in Tibet, but he had heard that there was a dark
prison in Gyantse, where criminals sometimes died of scorpion bites; he
added that only the worst offenders were punished in this way. The
modified version of the story is gruesome enough.

It is usual for Tibetan and Bhutanese officials to receive their pay in
grain, it being understood that their position puts them in the way of
obtaining the other necessaries of life, and perhaps a few of its
luxuries. Kasi, being an important official, receives from the Bhutan
Government forty maunds of barley and forty maunds of rice annually. He
receives, in addition, a commission on the trade disputes that he
decides in proportion to their importance. He is now an invaluable
servant of the British Government. At his nod the barren solitudes round
Phari are wakening into life. From the fort bastions one sees sometimes
on the hills opposite an indistinct black line, like a caterpillar
gradually assuming shape. They are Kasi's yaks coming from some blind
valley which no one but a hunter or mountaineer would have imagined to
exist. Ponies, grain, and fodder are also imported from Bhutan and sold
to the mutual gratification of the Bhutanese and ourselves. The yaks are
hired and employed on the line of communications.

It is to be hoped that the Bhutanese, when they hear of our good prices,
will send supplies over the frontier to hasten our advance. But we must
take care than no harm befalls Kasi for his good services. When I asked
him how he stood with the Tibetan Government, he laid his hand in a
significant manner across his throat.


    LINGMATHANG,
      _February._

Before entering the bare, unsheltered plateau of Tibet, the road to
Lhasa winds through seven miles of pine forest, which recalls some of
the most beautiful valleys of Switzerland.

The wood-line ends abruptly. After that there is nothing but barrenness
and desolation. The country round Chumbi is not very thickly forested.
There are long strips of arable land on each side of the road, and
villages every two or three miles. The fields are terraced and enclosed
within stone walls. Scattered on the hillside are stone-built houses,
with low, over-hanging eaves, and long wooden tiles, each weighed down
with a gray boulder. One might imagine one's self in Kandersteg or
Lauterbrunnen; only lofty praying flags and _mani_-walls brightly
painted with Buddhistic pictures and inscriptions dispel the illusion.

There is no lack of colour. In the winter months a brier with large red
berries and a low, foxy-brown thornbush, like a young osier in March,
lend a russet hue to the landscape. Higher on the hills the withered
grass is yellow, and the blending of these quiet tints, russet, brown,
and yellow, gives the valley a restful beauty; but in cloud it is
sombre enough.

Three years ago I visited Yatung in May. In springtime there is a
profusion of colour. The valley is beautiful, beyond the beauty of the
grandest Alpine scenery, carpeted underfoot with spring flowers, and
ablaze overhead with flowering rhododendrons. To try to describe
mountains and forests is a most unprofitable task; all the adjectives of
scenic description are exhausted; the coinage has been too long debased.
For my own part, it has been almost a pain to visit the most beautiful
parts of the earth and to know that one's sensations are incommunicable,
that it is impossible to make people believe and understand. To those
who have not seen, scenery is either good, bad, or indifferent; there
are no degrees. Ruskin, the greatest master of description, is most
entertaining when he is telling us about the domestic circle at Herne
Hill. But mountain scenery is of all the most difficult to describe. The
sense of the Himalayas is intangible. There are elusive lights and
shades, and sounds and whispers, and unfamiliar scents, and a thousand
fleeting manifestations of the genius of the place that are impossible
to arrest. Magnificent, majestic, splendid, are weak, colourless words
that depict nothing. It is the poets who have described what they have
not seen who have been most successful. Milton's hell is as real as any
landscape of Byron's, and the country through which Childe Roland rode
to the Dark Tower is more vivid and present to us than any of
Wordsworth's Westmoreland tarns and valleys. So it is a poem of the
imagination--'Kubla Khan'--that seems to me to breathe something of the
spirit of the Yatung and Chumbi Valleys, only there is a little less of
mystery and gloom here, and a little more of sunshine and brightness
than in the dream poem. Instead of attempting to describe the
valley--Paradise would be easier to describe--I will try to explain as
logically as possible why it fascinated me more than any scenery I have
seen.

I had often wondered if there were any place in the East where flowers
grow in the same profusion as in Europe--in England, or in Switzerland.
The nearest approach I had seen was in the plateau of the Southern Shan
States, at about 4,000 feet, where the flora is very homelike. But the
ground is not _carpeted_; one could tread without crushing a blossom.
Flowers are plentiful, too, on the southern slopes of the Himalayas, and
on the hills on the Siamese side of the Tennasserim frontier, but I had
seen nothing like a field of marsh-marigolds and cuckoo-flowers in May,
or a meadow of buttercups and daisies, or a bank of primroses, or a wood
carpeted with bluebells, or a hillside with heather, or an Alpine slope
with gentians and ranunculus. I had been told that in Persia in
springtime the valleys of the Shapur River and the Karun are covered
profusely with lilies, also the forests of Manchuria in the
neighbourhood of the Great White Mountain; but until I crossed the
Jelapla and struck down the valley to Yatung I thought I would have to
go West to see such things again. Never was such profusion. Besides the
primulas[10]--I counted eight different kinds of them--and gentians and
anemones and celandines and wood sorrel and wild strawberries and
irises, there were the rhododendrons glowing like coals through the pine
forest. As one descended the scenery became more fascinating; the valley
narrowed, and the stream was more boisterous. Often the cliffs hung
sheer over the water's edge; the rocks were coated with green and yellow
moss, which formed a bed for the dwarf rhododendron bushes, now in full
flower, white and crimson and cream, and every hue between a dark
reddish brown and a light sulphury yellow--not here and there, but
everywhere, jostling one another for nooks and crannies in the rock.[11]

  [10] Between Gnatong and Gautsa, thirteen different species of
      primulas are found. They are: _Primula Petiolaris_, _P. glabra_,
      _P. Sapphirina_, _P. pusilia_, _P. Kingii_, _P. Elwesiana_, _P.
      Capitata_, _P. Sikkimensis_, _P. Involucra_, _P. Denticulata_,
      _P. Stuartii_, _P. Soldanelloides_, _P. Stirtonia_.

  [11] The species are: _Rhododendron campanulatum_, purple flowers;
      _R. Fulgens_, scarlet; _R. Hodgsonii_, rose-coloured; _R.
      Anthopogon_, white; _R. Virgatum_, purple; _R. Nivale_, rose-red;
      _R. Wightii_, yellow; _R. Falconeri_, cream-coloured; _R.
      cinndbarinum_, brick-red ('The Gates of Tibet,' Appendix I., J.
      A. H. Louis).

These delicate flowers are very different from their dowdy cousin, the
coarse red rhododendron of the English shrubbery. At a little distance
they resemble more hothouse azaleas, and equal them in wealth of
blossom.

The great moss-grown rocks in the bed of the stream were covered with
equal profusion. Looking behind, the snows crowned the pine-trees, and
over them rested the blue sky. And here is the second reason--as I am
determined to be logical in my preference--why I found the valley so
fascinating. In contrasting the Himalayas with the Alps, there is always
something that the former is without. Never the snows, and the water,
and the greenery at the same time; if the greenery is at your feet, the
snows are far distant; where the Himalayas gain in grandeur they lose in
beauty. So I thought the wild valley of Lauterbrunnen, lying at the foot
of the Jungfrau, the perfection of Alpine scenery until I saw the valley
of Yatung, a pine-clad mountain glen, green as a hawthorn hedge in May,
as brilliantly variegated as a beechwood copse in autumn, and
culminating in the snowy peak that overhangs the Jelapla. The valley has
besides an intangible fascination, indescribable because it is
illogical. Certainly the light that played upon all these colours seemed
to me softer than everyday sunshine; and the opening spring foliage of
larch and birch and mountain ash seemed more delicate and varied than on
common ground. Perhaps it was that I was approaching the forbidden land.
But what irony, that this seductive valley should be the approach to
the most bare and unsheltered country in Asia!

Even now, in February, I can detect a few salmon-coloured leaf-buds,
which remind me that the month of May will be a revelation to the
mission force, when their veins are quickened by the unfamiliar warmth,
and their eyes dazzled by this unexpected treasure which is now
germinating in the brown earth.

Four miles beyond Chumbi the road passes through the second military
wall at the Chinese village of Gob-sorg. Riding through the quiet
gateway beneath the grim, hideous figure of the goddess Dolma carved on
the rock above, one feels a silent menace. One is part of more than a
material invasion; one has passed the gate that has been closed against
the profane for centuries; one has committed an irretrievable step.
Goddess and barrier are symbols of Tibet's spiritual and material
agencies of opposition. We have challenged and defied both. We have
entered the arena now, and are to be drawn into the vortex of all that
is most sacred and hidden, to struggle there with an implacable foe, who
is protected by the elemental forces of nature.

Inside the wall, above the road, stands the Chinese village of Gob-sorg.
The Chinamen come out of their houses and stand on the revetment to
watch us pass. They are as quiet and ugly as their gods. They gaze down
on our convoys and modern contrivances with a silent contempt that
implies a consciousness of immemorial superiority. Who can tell what
they think or what they wish, these undivinable creatures? They love
money, we know, and they love something else that we cannot know. It is
not country, or race, or religion, but an inscrutable something that may
be allied to these things, that induces a mental obstinacy, an
unfathomable reserve which may conceal a wisdom beyond our philosophy or
mere callousness and indifference. The thing is there, though it has no
European name or definition. It has caused many curious and unexplained
outbreaks in different parts of the world, and it is no doubt symbolized
in their inexpressibly hideous flag. The element is non-conductive, and
receives no current from progress, and it is therefore incommunicable to
us who are wrapped in the pride of evolution. The question here and
elsewhere is whether the Chinese love money more or this inscrutable
dragon element. If it is money, their masks must have concealed a
satisfaction at the prospect of the increased trade that follows our
flag; if the dragon element, a grim hope that we might be cut off in the
wilderness and annihilated by Asiatic hordes.

Unlike the Chinese, the Tomos are unaffectedly glad to see us in the
valley. The humblest peasant is the richer by our presence, and the
landowners and traders are more prosperous than they have been for many
years. Their uncompromising reception of us makes a withdrawal from the
Chumbi Valley impossible, for the Tibetans would punish them
relentlessly for the assistance they have given their enemies.

A mile beyond Gob-sorg is the Tibetan village of Galing-ka, where the
praying-flags are as thick as masts in a dockyard, and streams of paper
prayers are hung across the valley to prevent the entrance of evil
spirits. Chubby little children run out and salute one with a cry of
'Backsheesh!' the first alien word in their infant vocabulary.

A mile further a sudden turn in the valley brings one to a level
plain--a phenomenally flat piece of ground where one can race two miles
along the straight. No one passes it without remarking that it is the
best site for a hill-station in Northern India. Where else can one find
a racecourse, polo-ground, fishing, and shooting, and a rainfall that is
little more than a third of that of Darjeeling? Three hundred feet above
the stream on the west bank is a plateau, apparently intended for
building sites. The plain in the valley was naturally designed for the
training of mounted infantry, and is now, probably for the first time,
being turned to its proper use.


    LINGMATHANG,
      _March 18._

I have left the discomforts of Phari, and am camping now on the
Lingmathang Plain. I am writing in a natural cave in the rock. The
opening is walled in by a sangar of stones 5 feet high, from which
pine-branches support a projecting roof. On fine days the space between
the roof and wall is left open, and called the window; but when it
snows, gunny-bags are let down as purdahs, and the den becomes very warm
and comfortable. There is a natural hearth, a natural chimney-piece, and
a natural chimney that draws excellently. The place is sheltered by high
cliffs, and it is very pleasant to look out from this snugness on a
wintry landscape, and ground covered deep with snow.

Outside, seventy shaggy Tibetan ponies, rough and unshod, averaging 12.2
hands, are tethered under the shelter of a rocky cliff. They are being
trained according to the most approved methods of modern warfare. The
Mounted Infantry Corps, mostly volunteers from the 23rd and 32nd
Pioneers and 8th Gurkhas, are under the command of Captain Ottley of the
23rd. The corps was raised at Gnatong in December, and though many of
the men had not ridden before, after two months' training they cut a
very respectable figure in the saddle. A few years ago a proposal was
made to the military authorities that the Pioneers, like other
regiments, should go in for a course of mounted infantry training. The
reply caused much amusement at the time. The suggestion was not adopted,
but orders were issued that 'every available opportunity should be taken
of teaching the Pioneers to ride in carts.' A wag in the force naturally
suggests that the new Ekka Corps, now running between Phari and Tuna,
should be utilized to carry out the spirit of this order. Certainly on
the road beyond the Tangla the ekkas would require some sitting.

The present mission is the third 'show' on which the 23rd and 32nd have
been together during the last nine years. In Chitral and Waziristan they
fought side by side. It is no exaggeration to say that these regiments
have been on active service three years out of five since they were
raised in 1857. The original draft of the 32nd, it will be remembered,
was the unarmed volunteer corps of Mazbi Sikhs, who offered themselves
as an escort to the convoy from Lahore to Delhi during the siege. The
Mazbis were the most lawless and refractory folk in the Punjab, and had
long been the despair of Government. On arrival at Delhi they were
employed in the trenches, rushing in to fill up the places of the killed
and wounded as fast as they fell. It will be remembered that they formed
the fatigue party who carried the powder-bags to blow up the Cashmere
Gate. A hundred and fifty-seven of them were killed during the siege.
With this brilliant opening it is no wonder that they have been on
active service almost continually since.

A frontier campaign would be incomplete without the 32nd or 23rd. It was
the 32nd who cut their way through 5 feet of snow, and carried the
battery guns to the relief of Chitral. The 23rd Pioneers were also
raised from the Mazbi Sikhs in the same year of the Mutiny, 1857. The
history of the two regiments is very similar. The 23rd distinguished
themselves in China, Abyssinia, Afghanistan, and numerous frontier
campaigns. One of the most brilliant exploits was when, with the Gordon
Highlanders under Major (now Sir George) White, they captured the Afghan
guns at Kandahar. To-day the men of the two regiments meet again as
members of the same corps on the Lingmathang Plain. Naturally the most
cordial relations exist between the men, and one can hear them
discussing old campaigns as they sit round their pinewood fires in the
evenings. They and the twenty men of the 8th Gurkhas (of Manipur fame)
turn out together every morning for exercise on their diminutive steeds.
They ride without saddle or stirrups, and though they have only been
horsemen for two months, they seldom fall off at the jumps. The other
day, when a Mazbi Sikh took a voluntary into the hedge, a genial Gurkha
reminded him of the eccentric order 'to practise riding in carts.'

At Lingmathang we have had a fair amount of sport of a desultory kind.
The neighbouring forests are the home of that very rare and little-known
animal, the shao, or Sikkim stag. The first animal of the species to
fall to a European gun was shot by Major Wallace Dunlop on the
Lingmathang Hills in January. A month later Captain Ottley wounded a
buck which he was not able to follow up on account of a heavy fall of
snow. Lately one or two shao--does in all cases--have come down to visit
the plain. While we were breakfasting on the morning of the 16th, we
heard a great deal of shouting and halloaing, and a Gurkha jemadar ran
up to tell us that a female shao, pursued by village dogs, had broken
through the jungle on the hillside and emerged on the plain a hundred
yards from our camp. We mounted at once, and Ottley deployed the mounted
infantry, who were ready for parade, to head the beast from the hills.
The shao jinked like a hare, and crossed and recrossed the stream
several times, but the poor beast was exhausted, and, after twenty
minutes' exciting chase, we surrounded it. Captain Ottley threw himself
on the animal's neck and held it down until a sepoy arrived with ropes
to bind its hind-legs. The chase was certainly a unique incident in the
history of sport--a field of seventy in the Himalayas, a clear spurt in
the open, no dogs, and the quarry the rarest zoological specimen in the
world. The beast stood nearly 14 hands, and was remarkable for its long
ears and elongated jaw. The sequel was sad. Besides the fright and
exhaustion, the captured shao sustained an injury in the loin; it pined,
barely nibbled at its food, and, after ten days, died.

Sikkim stags are sometimes shot by native shikaris, and there is great
rivalry among members of the mission force in buying their heads. They
are shy, inaccessible beasts, and they are not met with beyond the wood
limit.

The shooting in the Chumbi Valley is interesting to anyone fond of
natural history, though it is a little disappointing from the
sportsman's point of view. When officers go out for a day's shooting,
they think they have done well if they bring home a brace of pheasants.
When the sappers and miners began to work on the road below Gautsa, the
blood-pheasants used to come down to the stream to watch the operations,
but now one sees very few game-birds in the valley. The minal is
occasionally shot. The cock-bird, as all sportsmen know, is, with the
exception of the Argus-eye, the most beautiful pheasant in the world.
There is a lamasery in the neighbourhood, where the birds are almost
tame. The monks who feed them think that they are inhabited by the
spirits of the blest. Where the snow melts in the pine-forests and
leaves soft patches and moist earth, you will find the blood-pheasant.
When you disturb them they will run up the hillside and call
vociferously from their new hiding-place, so that you may get another
shot. Pheasant-shooting here is not sport; the birds seldom rise, and
when they do it is almost impossible to get a shot at them in the thick
jungle. One must shoot them running for the pot. Ten or a dozen is not a
bad bag for one gun later in the year, when more snow has fallen.

At a distance the blood-pheasant appears a dowdy bird. The hen is quite
insignificant, but, on a closer acquaintance, the cock shows a delicate
colour-scheme of mauve, pink, and green, which is quite different from
the plumage of any other bird I have seen. The skins fetch a good price
at home, as fishermen find them useful for making flies. A sportsman
who has shot in the Yatung Valley regularly for four years tells me that
the cock-bird of this species is very much more numerous than the hen.
Another Chumbi pheasant is the tracopan, a smaller bird than the minal,
and very beautifully marked. I have not heard of a tracopan being shot
this season; the bird is not at all common anywhere on this side of the
Himalayas.

Snow-partridge sometimes come down to the Lingmathang hills; in the
adjacent Kongbu Valley they are plentiful. These birds are gregarious,
and are found among the large, loose boulders on the hill-tops. In
appearance they are a cross between the British grouse and the
red-legged partridge, having red feet and legs uncovered with feathers,
and a red bill and chocolate breast. The feathers of the back and rump
are white, with broad, defined bars of rich black.

Another common bird is the snow-pigeon. Large flocks of them may be seen
circling about the valley anywhere between Phari and Chumbi. Sometimes,
when we are sitting in our cave after dinner, we hear the tweek of
solitary snipe flying overhead, but we have never flushed any. Every
morning before breakfast I stroll along the river bank with a gun, and
often put up a stray duck. I have frequently seen goosanders on the
river, but not more than two or three in a party. They never leave the
Himalayas. The only migratory duck I have observed are the common teal
and Brahminy or ruddy sheldrake, and these only in pairs. The latter,
though despised on the plains, are quite edible up here. I discredit the
statement that they feed on carrion, as I have never seen one near the
carcasses of the dead transport animals that are only too plentiful in
the valley just now. After comparing notes with other sportsmen, I
conclude that the Ammo Chu Valley is not a regular route for migratory
duck. The odd teal that I shot in February were probably loiterers that
were not strong enough to join in the flight southwards.

Near Lingmathang I shot the ibis bill (_Ibidorhynchus Struthersi_), a
bird which is allied to the oyster catchers. This was the first Central
Asian species I met.


    GAUTSA,
      _February._

Gautsa, which lies five miles north of Lingmathang, nearly half-way
between Chumbi and Phari, must be added to the map. A week or two ago
the place was deserted and unnamed; it did not boast a single cowherd's
hut. Now it is a busy camp, and likely to be a permanent halting-place
on the road to Phari. The camp lies in a deep, moss-carpeted hollow,
with no apparent egress. On three sides it is flanked by rocky cliffs,
densely forested with pine and silver birch; on the fourth rises an
abrupt wall of rock, which is suffused with a glow of amber light an
hour before sunset. The Ammo Chu, which is here nothing but a 20-foot
stream frozen over at night, bisects the camp. The valley is warm and
sheltered, and escapes much of the bitter wind that never spares Chumbi.
After dinner one prefers the open-air and a camp fire. Officers who have
been up the line before turn into their tents regretfully, for they know
that they are saying good-bye to comfort, and will not enjoy the genial
warmth of a good fire again until they have crossed the bleak Tibetan
tablelands and reached the sparsely-wooded Valley of Gyantse.




CHAPTER IV

PHARI JONG


    _February 15._

Icy winds and suffocating smoke are not conducive to a literary style,
though they sometimes inspire a rude eloquence that is quite unfit for
publication. As I write we are huddling over the mess-room brazier--our
youngest optimist would not call it a fire. Men drop in now and then
from fatigue duty, and utter an incisive phrase that expresses the
general feeling, while we who write for an enlightened public must
sacrifice force for euphemism. A week at Phari dispels all illusions;
only a bargee could adequately describe the place. Yet the elements,
which 'feelingly persuade us' what we are, sometimes inspire us with the
eloquence of discomfort.

At Gautsa the air was scented with the fragrance of warm pine-trees, and
there was no indication of winter save the ice on the Ammo Chu. The
torrent roared boisterously beneath its frozen surface, and threw up
little tentacles of frozen spray, which glistened fantastically in the
sun. Three miles further up the stream the wood-belt ends abruptly;
then, after another three miles, one passes the last stunted bush; after
that there is nothing but brown earth and yellow withered grass.

Five miles above Gautsa is Dotah, the most cheerless camp on the march.
The wind blows through the gorge unceasingly, and penetrates to the
bone. On the left bank of the stream is the frozen waterfall, which
might be worshipped by the fanciful and superstitious as embodying the
genius of the place, hard and resistless, a crystallized monument of the
implacable spirit of Nature in these high places.

At Kamparab, where we camped, two miles higher up the stream, the
thermometer fell to 14 deg. below zero. Close by is the meeting-place of the
sources of the Ammo Chu. All the plain is undermined with the warrens of
the long-haired marmots and voles, who sit on their thresholds like a
thousand little spies, and curiously watch our approach, then dive down
into their burrows to tell their wives of the strange bearded invaders.
They are the despair of their rivals, the sappers and miners, who are
trying to make a level road for the new light ekkas. One envies them
their warmth and snugness as one rides against the bitter penetrating
winds.

Twelve miles from Gautsa a turn in the valley brings one into view of
Phari Jong. At first sight it might be a huge isolated rock, but as one
approaches the bastions and battlements become more distinct. Distances
are deceptive in this rarefied air, and objects that one imagines to be
quite close are sometimes found to be several miles distant.

The fort is built on a natural mound in the plain. It is a huge rambling
building six stories high, surrounded by a courtyard, where mules and
ponies are stabled. As a military fortification Phari Jong is by no
means contemptible. The walls are of massive stonework which would take
heavy guns to demolish. The angles are protected from attacking parties
by machicolated galleries, and three enormous bastions project from each
flank. These are crumbling in places, and the Pioneers might destroy the
bastion and breach the wall with a bag or two of guncotton. On the
eastern side there is a square courtyard like an Arab caravanserai,
where cattle are penned. The fortress would hold the whole Tibetan army,
with provisions for a year. It was evacuated the night before we
reconnoitred the valley.

The interior of the Jong is a warren of stairs, landings, and dark
cavernous rooms, which would take a whole day to explore. The walls are
built of stone and mud, and coated with century-old smoke. There are no
chimneys or adequate windows, and the filth is indescribable. When Phari
was first occupied, eighty coolies were employed a whole week clearing
away refuse. Judging by the accretion of dirt, a new-comer might class
the building as medieval; but filth is no criterion of age, for
everything left in the same place becomes quickly coated with grime an
inch thick. The dust that invades one's tent at Chumbi is clean and
wholesome compared to the Phari dirt, which is the filth of human
habitation, the secretion of centuries of foul living. It falls from the
roof on one's head, sticks to one's clothes as one brushes against the
wall, and is blown up into one's eyes and throat from the floor.

The fort is most insanitary, but a military occupation is necessary. The
hacking coughs which are prevalent among officers and men are due to
impurities of the air which affect the lungs. Cartloads of dirt are
being scraped away every day, but gusts of wind from the lower stories
blow up more dust, which penetrates every nook and cranny of the
draughty rooms, so that there is a fresh layer by nightfall. To clear
the lower stories and cellars would be a hopeless task; even now rooms
are found in unexpected places which emit clouds of dust whenever the
wind eddies round the basement.

I explored the ground-floor with a lantern, and was completely lost in
the maze of passages and dark chambers. When we first occupied the fort,
they were filled with straw, gunpowder, and old arms. A hundred and
forty maunds of inferior gunpowder was destroyed, and the arms now
litter the courtyard. These the Tibetans themselves abandoned as
rubbish. The rusty helmets, shields, and breastplates are made of the
thinnest iron plates interlaced with leathern thongs, and would not
stop an arrow. The old bell-mouthed matchlocks, with their wooden
ground-rests, would be more dangerous to the Tibetan marksmen than the
enemy. The slings and bows and arrows are reckoned obsolete even by
these primitive warriors. Perhaps they attribute more efficacy to the
praying-wheels which one encounters at every corner of the fort. The
largest are in niches in the wall to left and right of the gateway; rows
of smaller ones are attached to the banisters on the landings and to the
battlements of the roof. The wheels are covered with grime--the grime of
Lamas' hands. Dirt and religion are inseparable in Tibet. The Lamas
themselves are the most filthy and malodorous folk I have met in the
country. From this it must not be inferred that one class is more
cleanly in its habits than another, for nobody ever thinks of washing.
Soap is not included in the list of sundries that pass the Customs House
at Yatung. If the Lamas are dirtier than the yak-herds and itinerant
merchants it is because they lead an indoor life, whereas the pastoral
folk are continually exposed to the purifying winds of the tablelands,
which are the nearest equivalent in Tibet to a cold bath.

I once read of a Tibetan saint, one of the pupils of Naropa, who was
credited with a hundred miraculous gifts, one of which was that he could
dive into the water like a fish. Wherein the miracle lay had often
puzzled me, but when I met the Lamas of the Kanjut Gompa I understood
at once that it was the holy man's contact with the water.

Phari is eloquent of piety, as it is understood in Tibet. The better
rooms are frescoed with Buddhistic paintings, and on the third floor is
a library, now used as a hospital, where xylograph editions of the
Lamaist scriptures and lives of the saints are pigeon-holed in lockers
in the wall. The books are printed on thin oblong sheets of Chinese
paper, enclosed in boards, and illuminated with quaint coloured
tailpieces of holy men in devotional attitudes. Phari fort, with its
casual blending of East and West, is full of incongruous effects, but
the oddest and most pathetic incongruity is the chorten on the roof,
from which, amidst praying-flags and pious offerings of coloured
raiment, flutters the Union Jack.


    _February 18._

The troops are so busy making roads that they have very little time for
amusements. The 8th Gurkhas have already constructed some eight miles of
road on each side of Phari for the ekka transport. Companies of the 23rd
Pioneers are repairing the road at Dotah, Chumbi, and Rinchengong. The
32nd are working at Rinchengong, and the sappers and miners on the
Nathula and at Gautsa.

We have started football, and the Gurkhas have a very good idea of the
game. One loses one's wind completely at this elevation after every
spurt of twenty yards, but recovers it again in a wonderfully short
time. Other amusements are sliding and tobogganing, which are a little
disappointing to enthusiasts. The ice is lumpy and broken, and the
streamlets that run down to the plain are so tortuous that fifty yards
without a spill is considered a good run for a toboggan. The funniest
sight is to see the Gurkha soldiers trying to drag the toboggan uphill,
slipping and tumbling and sprawling on the ice, and immensely enjoying
one another's discomfiture.

To clear the dust from one's throat and shake off the depression caused
by weeks of waiting in the same place, there is nothing like a day's
shooting or exploring in the neighbourhood of Phari. I get up sometimes
before daybreak, and spend the whole day reconnoitring with a small
party of mounted infantry. Yesterday we crossed a pass which looked down
into the Kongbu Valley--a likely camping-ground for the Tibetan troops.
The valley is connected to the north with the Tuna plateau, and is
almost as fertile in its lower stretches as Chumbi. A gray fortress
hangs over the cliff on the western side of the valley, and above it
tower the glaciers of Shudu-Tsenpa and the Gora Pass into Sikkim. On the
eastern side, at a creditable distance from the fort, we could see the
Kongbu nunnery, which looked from where we stood like an old Roman
viaduct. The nuns, I was told, are rarely celibate; they shave the head
and wear no ornaments.

Riding back we saw some burrhel on the opposite hills, too far off to
make a successful stalk possible. The valley is full of them, and a week
later some officers from Phari on a yak-collecting expedition got
several good heads. The Tibetan gazelle, or goa (_Gazella
hirticaudata_), is very common on the Phari plateau, and we bagged two
that afternoon. When the force first occupied the Jong, they were so
tame that a sportsman could walk up to within 100 yards of a herd, and
it was not an uncommon thing for three buck to fall to the same gun in a
morning. Now one has to manoeuvre a great deal to get within 300 yards
of them.

Sportsmen who have travelled in other parts of Tibet say the goa are
very shy and inaccessible. Perhaps their comparative tameness near Phari
may be accounted for by the fact that the old trade route crosses the
plateau, and they have never been molested by the itinerant merchants
and carriers. Gazelle meat is excellent. It has been a great resource
for the garrison. No epicure could wish for anything better.

Another unfamiliar beast that one meets in the neighbourhood of Phari is
the kyang, or Tibetan wild ass (_Equus hemionus_), one or two of which
have been shot for specimens. The kyang is more like a zebra than a
horse or donkey. Its flesh, I believe, is scorned even by
camp-followers. Hare are fairly plentiful, but they are quite
flavourless. A huge solitary gray wolf (_Canis laniger_) was shot the
other day, the only one of its kind I have seen. Occasionally one puts
up a fox. The Tibetan species has a very fine brush that fetches a fancy
price in the bazaar. At present there is too much ice on the plain to
hunt them, but they ought to give good sport in the spring.

It was dark when we rode into the Jong. After a long day in the saddle,
dinner is good, even though it is of yak's flesh, and it is good to sit
in front of a fire even though the smoke chokes you. I went so far as to
pity the cave-dwellers at Chumbi. Phari is certainly very much colder,
but it has its diversions and interests. There is still some shooting to
be had, and the place has a quaint old-world individuality of its own,
which seasons the monotony of life to a contemplative man. One is on the
borderland, and one has a Micawber-like feeling that something may turn
up. After dinner there is bridge, which fleets the time considerably,
but at Chumbi there were no diversions of any kind--nothing but dull,
blank, uninterrupted monotony.


    _February 20._

For two days half a blizzard has been blowing, and expeditions have been
impossible. Everything one eats and drinks has the same taste of argol
smoke. At breakfast this morning we had to put our _chapatties_ in our
pockets to keep them clean, and kept our meat covered with a soup-plate,
making surreptitious dives at it with a fork. After a few seconds'
exposure it was covered with grime. Sausages and bully beef, which had
just been boiled, were found to be frozen inside. The smoke in the
mess-room was suffocating. So to bed, wrapped in sheepskins and a
sleeping-bag. Under these depressing conditions I have been reading the
narratives of Bogle and Manning, old English worthies who have left on
record the most vivid impressions of the dirt and cold and misery of
Phari.

It is ninety years since Thomas Manning passed through Phari on his way
to Lhasa. Previously to his visit we only know of two Englishmen who
have set foot in Phari--Bogle in 1774, and Turner in 1783, both
emissaries of Warren Hastings. Manning's journal is mostly taken up with
complaints of his Chinese servant, who seems to have gained some
mysterious ascendancy over him, and to have exercised it most
unhandsomely. As a traveller Manning had a genius for missing effects;
it is characteristic of him that he spent sixteen days at Phari, yet
except for a casual footnote, evidently inserted in his journal after
his return, he makes no mention of the Jong. Were it not for Bogle's
account of thirty years before, we might conclude that the building was
not then in existence.

On October 21, 1811, Manning writes in his diary: 'We arrived at Phari
Jong. Frost. Frost also two days before. I was lodged in a strange
place, but so were the natives.' On the 27th he summarized his
impressions of Phari:--'Dirt, dirt, grease, smoke, misery, but good
mutton.'

Manning's journal is expressive, if monosyllabic. He was of the class
of subjective travellers, who visit the ends of the earth to record
their own personal discomforts. Sensitive, neurotic, ever on the
look-out for slights, he could not have been a happy vagabond. A dozen
lines record the impressions of his first week at Phari. He was cheated;
he was treated civilly; he slighted the magistrates, mistaking them for
idle fellows; he was turned out of his room to make way for Chinese
soldiers; he quarrelled with his servant. A single extract portrays the
man to the life, as if he were sitting dejectedly by his yak-dung fire
at this hour brooding over his wrongs:--

"The Chinaman was cross again." Says I, "Was that a bird at the
magistrate's that flapped so loud?" Answer: "What signifies whether it
was a bird or not?" Where he sat I thought he might see; and I was
curious to know if such large birds frequented the _building_. These are
the answers I get. He is always discontented and grumbling, and takes no
trouble off my hands. Being younger, and, like all Asiatics, able to
stoop and crouch without pain or difficulty, he might assist me in many
things without trouble to himself. A younger brother or any English
young gentleman would in his place of course lay the cloth, and do other
little services when I am tired; but he does not seem to have much of
the generous about him, nor does he in any way serve me, or behave to me
with any show of affection or goodwill: consequently I grow no more
attached to him than the first day I saw him. I could not have thought
it possible for me to have lived so long with anyone without either
disliking him or caring sixpence for him. He has good qualities, too.
The strangeness of his situation may partly excuse him. (I am more
attached to my guide, with all his faults, who has been with me but a
few days.) My guide has behaved so damnably ill since I wrote that, that
I wish it had not come into my mind.'

I give the extract at length, not only as an illuminating portrait of
Manning, but as an incidental proof that he visited the Jong, and that
it was very much the same building then as it is to-day. But had it not
been for the flapping of the bird which occasioned the quarrel with his
Chinese servant, Manning would have left Phari without a reference to
the wonderful old fortress which is the most romantic feature on the
road from India to Gyantse. Appended to the journal is this footnote to
the word _building_, which I have italicized in the extract: 'The
building is immensely large, six or more stories high, a sort of
fortress. At a distance it appears to be all Phari Jong. Indeed, most of
it consists of miserable galleries and holes.'

Members of the mission force who have visited Phari will no doubt
attribute Manning's evident ill-humour and depression during his stay
there to the environments of the place, which have not changed much in
the last ninety years. But his spirits improved as he continued his
journey to Gyantse and Lhasa, and he reveals himself the kindly,
eccentric, and affectionate soul who was the friend and intimate of
Charles Lamb.

Bogle arrived at Phari on October 23, 1774. He and Turner and Manning
all entered Tibet through Bhutan. 'As we advanced,' he wrote in his
journal, 'we came in sight of the castle of Phari Jong, which cuts a
good figure from without. It rises into several towers with the
balconies, and, having few windows, has the look of strength; it is
surrounded by the town.' The only other reference he makes to the Jong
shows us that the fortress was in bad repair so long ago as 1774. 'The
two Lhasa officers who have the government of Phari Jong sent me some
butter, tea, etc., the day after my arrival; and letting me know that
they expected a visit from me, I went. The inside of the castle did not
answer the notion I had formed of it. The stairs are ladders worn to the
bone, and the rooms are little better than garrets.'

The origin of the fort is unknown. Some of the inhabitants of Phari say
that it was built more than a hundred years ago, when the Nepalese were
overrunning Sikkim. But this is obviously incorrect, as the
Tibetan-Nepalese War, in which the Chinese drove the Gurkhas out of
Tibet, and defeated their army within a day's march of Khatmandu, took
place in 1788-1792, whereas Bogle's description of the Jong was written
fourteen years earlier. A more general impression is that centuries ago
orders came from Lhasa to collect stones on the hillsides, and the
building was constructed by forced labour in a few months. That is a
tale of endurance and suffering that might very likely be passed from
father to son for generations.

Bogle's description of the town might have been written by an officer of
the garrison to-day, only he wrote from the inmate's point of view. He
noticed the houses 'so huddled together that one may chance to overlook
them,' and the flat roofs covered with bundles of straw. He knocked his
head against the low ceilings, and ran against the pillars that
supported the beams. 'In the middle of the roof,' he wrote, 'is a hole
to let out smoke, which, however, departs not without making the whole
room as black as a chimney. The opening serves also to let in the light;
the doors are full of holes and crevices, through which the women and
children keep peeping.' Needless to say nothing has changed in the last
hundred and thirty years, unless it is that the women are bolder. I
looked down from the roof this morning on Phari town, lying like a
rabbit-warren beneath the fort. All one can see from the battlement are
the flat roofs of low black houses, from which smoke issues in dense
fumes. The roofs are stacked with straw, and connected by a web of
coloured praying-flags running from house to house, and sometimes over
the narrow alleys that serve as streets. Enormous fat ravens perch on
the wall, and innumerable flocks of twittering sparrows. For warmth's
sake most of the rooms are underground, and in these subterranean dens
Tibetans, black as coal-heavers, huddle together with yaks and mules.
Tibetan women, equally dirty, go about, their faces smeared and blotched
with caoutchouc, wearing a red, hoop-like head-dress, ornamented with
alternate turquoises and ruby-coloured stones.

In the fort the first thing one meets of a morning is a troop of these
grimy sirens, climbing the stairs, burdened with buckets of chopped ice
and sacks of yak-dung, the two necessaries of life. The Tibetan coolie
women are merry folk; they laugh and chatter over their work all day
long, and do not in the least resist the familiarities of the Gurkha
soldiers. Sometimes as they pass one they giggle coyly, and put out the
tongue, which is their way of showing respect to those in high places;
but when one hears their laughter echoing down the stairs it is
difficult to believe that it is not intended for saucy impudence. Their
merriment sounds unnatural in all this filth and cold and discomfort.
Certainly if Bogle returned to Phari he would find the women very much
bolder, though, I am afraid, not any cleaner. Could he see the
Englishmen in Phari to-day, he might not recognise his compatriots.

Often in civilized places I shall think of the group at Phari in the
mess-room after dinner--a group of ruffianly-looking bandits in a
blackened, smut-begrimed room, clad in wool and fur from head to foot,
bearded like wild men of the woods, and sitting round a yak-dung fire,
drinking rum. After a week at Phari the best-groomed man might qualify
for a caricature of Bill Sikes. Perhaps one day in Piccadilly one may
encounter a half-remembered face, and something familiar in walk or gait
may reveal an old friend of the Jong. Then in 'Jimmy's,' memories of
argol-smoke and frozen moustaches will give a zest to a bottle of beaune
or chablis, which one had almost forgotten was once dreamed of among the
unattainable luxuries of life.


    _March 26-28._

Orders have come to advance from Phari Jong. It seems impossible,
unnatural, that we are going on. After a week or two the place becomes
part of one's existence; one feels incarcerated there. It is difficult
to imagine life anywhere else. One feels as if one could never again be
cold or dirty, or miserably uncomfortable, without thinking of that gray
fortress with its strange unknown history, standing alone in the
desolate plain. For my own part, speaking figuratively--and unfigurative
language is impotent on an occasion like this--the place will leave an
indelible black streak--very black indeed--on a kaleidoscopic past.
There can be no faint impressions in one's memories of Phari Jong. The
dirt and smoke and dust are elemental, and the cold is the cold of the
Lamas' frigid hell.

All the while I was in Phari I forgot the mystery of Tibet. I have felt
it elsewhere, but in the Jong I only wondered that the inscrutable folk
who had lived in the rooms where we slept, and fled in the night, were
content with their smut-begrimed walls, blackened ceilings, and
chimneyless roofs, and still more how amidst these murky environments
any spiritual instincts could survive to inspire the religious
frescoings on the wall. Yet every figure in this intricate blending of
designs is significant and symbolical. One's first impression is that
these allegories and metaphysical abstractions must have been
meaningless to the inmates of the Jong; for we in Europe cannot
dissociate the artistic expression of religious feeling from cleanliness
and refinement, or at least pious care. One feels that they must be the
relics of a decayed spirituality, preserved not insincerely, but in
ignorant superstition, like other fetishes all over the world. Yet this
feeling of scepticism is not so strong after a month or two in Tibet. At
first one is apt to think of these dirty people as merely animal and
sensual, and to attribute their religious observances to the fear of
demons who will punish the most trivial omission in ritual.

Next one begins to wonder if they really believe in the efficacy of
mechanical prayer, if they take the trouble to square their conscience
with their inclinations, and if they have any sincere desire to be
absorbed in the universal spirit. Then there may come a suspicion that
the better classes, though not given to inquiry, have a settled dogma
and definite convictions about things spiritual and natural that are
not easily upset. Perhaps before we turn our backs on the mystery of
Tibet we will realize that the Lamas despise us as gross materialists
and philistines--we who are always groping and grasping after the
particular, while they are absorbed in the sublime and universal.

After all, devious and unscrupulous as their policy may have been, the
Tibetans have had one definite aim in view for centuries--the
preservation of their Church and State by the exclusion of all foreign
and heretical influences. When we know that the Mongol cannot conceive
of the separation of the spiritual and temporal Government, it is only
natural to infer that the first mission, spiritual or otherwise, to a
foreign Court should introduce the first elements of dissolution in a
system of Government that has held the country intact for centuries. And
let it be remarked that Great Britain is not responsible for this
deviation in a hitherto inveterate policy.

But to return to Phari. My last impression of the place as I passed out
of its narrow alleys was a very dirty old man, seated on a heap of
yak-dung over the gutter. He was turning his prayer-wheel, and muttering
the sacred formula that was to release him from all rebirth in this
suffering world. The wish seemed natural enough.

It was a bright, clear morning when we turned our backs on the old fort
and started once more on the road to Lhasa. Five miles from Phari we
passed the miserable little village of Chuggya, which is apparently
inhabited by ravens and sparrows, and a diminutive mountain-finch that
looks like a half-starved robin. A mile to the right before entering the
village is the monastery of the Red Lamas, which was the lodging-place
of the Bhutanese Envoy during his stay at Phari. The building, which is
a landmark for miles, is stone-built, and coated over with red earth,
which gives it the appearance of brick. Its overhanging gables,
mullioned windows without glass, that look like dominoes in the
distance, the pendent bells, and the gay decorations of Chinese paper,
look quaint and mystical, and are in keeping with the sacred character
of the place. Bogle stopped here on October 27, 1774, and drank tea with
the Abbot. It is very improbable that any other white man has set foot
in the monastery since, until the other day, when some of the garrison
paid it a visit and took photographs of the interior. The Lamas were a
little deprecatory, but evidently amused. I did not expect them to be so
tolerant of intrusion, and their clamour for backsheesh on our departure
dispelled one more illusion.

At Chuggya we were at the very foot of Chumulari (23,930 feet), which
seems to rise sheer from the plain. The western flank is an abrupt wall
of rock, but, as far as one can see, the eastern side is a gradual
ascent of snow, which would present no difficulties to the trained
mountaineer. One could ride up to 17,000 feet, and start the climb from
a base 2,000 feet higher than Mont Blanc. Chumulari is the most sacred
mountain in Tibet, and it is usual for devout Buddhists to stop and
offer a sacrifice as they pass. Bogle gives a detailed account of the
service, the rites of which are very similar to some I witnessed at
Galingka on the Tibetan New Year, February 16.

'Here we halted,' he wrote in his journal, 'and the servants gathering
together a parcel of dried cow-dung, one of them struck fire with his
tinder-box and lighted it. When the fire was well kindled, Parma took
out a book of prayers, one brought a copper cup, another filled it with
a kind of fermented liquor out of a new-killed sheep's paunch, mixing in
some rice and flour; and after throwing some dried herbs and flour into
the flame, they began their rites. Parma acted as chaplain. He chanted
the prayers in a loud voice, the others accompanying him, and every now
and then the little cup was emptied towards the rock, about eight or ten
of these libations being poured forth. The ceremony was finished by
placing upon the heap of stones the little ensign which my fond
imagination had before offered up to my own vanity.'

Most of the flags and banners one sees to-day on the chortens and roofs
of houses, and cairns on the mountain-tops, must be planted with some
such inaugural ceremony.

Facing Chumulari on the west, and apparently only a few miles distant,
are the two Sikkim peaks of Powhunri (23,210 feet) and Shudu-Tsenpa
(22,960 feet). From Chuggya the Tangla is reached by a succession of
gradual rises and depressions. The pass is not impressive, like the
Jelap, as a passage won through a great natural barrier. One might cross
it without noticing the summit, were it not for the customary cairns and
praying-flags which the Lamas raise in all high places.

From a slight rise on the east of the pass one can look down across the
plateau on Tuna, an irregular black line like a caterpillar, dotted with
white spots, which glasses reveal to be tents. The Bamtso lake lies
shimmering to the east beneath brown and yellow hills. At noon objects
dance elusively in the mirage. Distances are deceptive. Yaks grazing are
like black Bedouin tents. Here, then, is the forbidden land. The
approach is as it should be. One's eyes explore the road to Lhasa dimly
through a haze. One would not have it laid out with the precision of a
diagram.




CHAPTER V

THE ROAD AND TRANSPORT


To write of any completed phase of the expedition at this stage, when I
have carried my readers only as far as Tuna, is a lapse in continuity
that requires an apology. My excuse is that to all transport officers,
and everyone who was in touch with them, the Tuna and Phari plains will
be remembered as the very backbone of resistance, the most implacable
barriers to our advance.

The expedition was essentially a transport 'show.' It is true that the
Tibetans proved themselves brave enemies, but their acquired military
resources are insignificant when compared with the obstacles Nature has
planted in the path of their enemies. The difficulty of the passes, the
severity of the climate, the sterility of the mountains and tablelands,
make the interior of the country almost inaccessible to an invading
army. That we went through these obstacles and reached Lhasa itself was
a matter of surprise not only to the Tibetans, but to many members of
the expeditionary force.

To appreciate the difficulties the mission force had to contend with,
one must first realize the extraordinary changes of climate that are
experienced in the journey from Siliguri to Tuna. Choose the coldest day
in the year at Kew Gardens, expose yourself freely to the wind, and then
spend five minutes in the tropical house, and you may gather some idea
of the sensation of sleeping in the Rungpo Valley the night after
crossing the Jelapla.

When I first made the journey in early January, even the Rungpo Valley
was chilly, and the vicissitudes were not so marked; but I felt the
change very keenly in March, when I made a hurried rush into Darjeeling
for equipment and supplies. Our camp at Lingmathang was in the
pine-forest at an elevation of 10,500 feet. It was warm and sunny in the
daytime, in places where there was shelter from the wind. Leaf-buds were
beginning to open, frozen waterfalls to thaw, migratory duck were coming
up the valley in twos and threes from the plains of India--even a few
vultures had arrived to fatten on the carcasses of the dead transport
animals. The morning after leaving Lingmathang I left the pine-forest at
13,000 feet, and entered a treeless waste of shale and rock. When I
crossed the Jelapla half a hurricane was blowing. The path was a sheet
of ice, and I had to use hands and knees, and take advantage of every
protuberance in the rock to prevent myself from being blown over the
_khud_. The road was impassable for mules and ponies. The cold was
numbing. The next evening, in a valley 13,000 feet beneath, I was
suffering from the extreme of heat. The change in scenery and vegetation
is equally striking--from glaciers and moraines to tropical forests
brilliant with the scarlet cotton-flower and purple Baleria. In Tibet I
had not seen an insect of any kind for two months, but in the Sikkim
valleys the most gorgeous butterflies were abundant, and the rest-house
at Rungpo was invested by a plague of flies. In the hot weather the
climate of the Sikkim valleys is more trying than that of most stations
in the plains of India. The valleys are close and shut in, and the heat
is intensified by the radiation from the rocks, cliffs, and boulders. In
the rains the climate is relaxing and malarious. The Supply and
Transport Corps, who were left behind at stages like Rungpo through the
hot weather, had, to my mind, a much harder time on the whole than the
half-frozen troops at the front, and they were left out of all the fun.

Besides the natural difficulties of the road, the severity of climate,
and the scarcity of fodder and fuel, the Transport Corps had to contend
with every description of disease and misfortune--anthrax, rinderpest,
foot and mouth disease, aconite and rhododendron poisoning, falling over
precipices, exhaustion from overwork and underfeeding. The worst
fatalities occurred on the Khamba Jong side in 1903. The experiments
with the transport were singularly unsuccessful. Out of two hundred
buffaloes employed at low elevations, only three survived, and the seven
camels that were tried on the road between Siliguri and Gantok all died
by way of protest. Later on in the year the yak corps raised in Nepal
was practically exterminated. From four to five thousand were originally
purchased, of which more than a thousand died from anthrax before they
reached the frontier. All the drinking-water on the route was infected;
the Nepalese did not believe the disease was contagious, and took no
precautions. The disease spread almost universally among the cattle, and
at the worst time twenty or thirty died a day. The beasts were massed on
the Nepal frontier. Segregation camps were formed, and ultimately, after
much patient care, the disease was stamped out.

Then began the historic march through Sikkim, which, as a protracted
struggle against natural calamities, might be compared to the retreat of
the Ten Thousand, or the flight of the Kalmuck Tartars. Superstitious
natives might well think that a curse had fallen on us and our cattle.
As soon as they were immune from anthrax, the reduced corps were
attacked by rinderpest, which carried off seventy. When the herds left
the Singli-la range and descended into the valley, the sudden change in
climate overwhelmed hundreds. No real yak survived the heat of the
Sikkim valleys. All that were now left were the zooms, or halfbreeds
from the bull-yaks and the cow, and the cross from the bull and female
yaks. In Sikkim, which is always a hotbed of contagious cattle diseases,
the wretched survivors were infected with foot and mouth disease. The
epidemic is not often fatal, but visiting an exhausted herd,
fever-stricken, and weakened by every vicissitude of climate, it carried
off scores. Then, to avoid spreading contagion, the yaks were driven
through trackless, unfrequented country, up and down precipitous
mountain-sides, and through dense forests. Again segregation camps were
formed, and the dead cattle were burnt, twenty and thirty at a time.
Every day there was a holocaust. Then followed the ascent into high
altitudes, where a more insidious evil awaited the luckless corps. The
few survivors were exterminated by pleuro-pneumonia. When, on January
23, the 3rd Yak Corps reached Chumbi, it numbered 437; two months
afterwards all but 70 had died. On March 21, 80 exhausted beasts
straggled into Chumbi; they were the remainder of the 1st and 2nd Yak
Corps, which originally numbered 2,300 heads. The officers, who, bearded
and weather-beaten, deserted by many of their followers, after months of
wandering, reached our camp with the remnants of the corps, told a story
of hardship and endurance that would provide a theme for an epic.

The epic of the yaks does not comprise the whole tale of disaster.
Rinderpest carried off 77 pack-bullocks out of 500, and a whole corps
was segregated for two months with foot and mouth disease. Amongst other
casualties there were heavy losses among the Cashmere pony corps, and
the Tibet pony corps raised locally. The animals were hastily mobilized
and incompletely equipped, overworked and underfed. Cheap and inferior
saddlery was issued, which gave the animals sore backs within a week.
The transport officer was in a constant dilemma. He had to overwork his
animals or delay the provisions, fodder, and warm clothing so urgently
needed at the front. Ponies and mules had no rest, but worked till they
dropped. Of the original draft of mules that were employed on the line
to Khamba Jong, fully 50 per cent. died. It is no good trying to blink
the fact that the expedition was unpopular, and that at the start many
economical shifts were attempted which proved much more expensive in the
end. Our party system is to blame. The Opposition must be appeased,
expenses kept down, and the business is entered into half-heartedly. In
the usual case a few companies are grudgingly sent to the front, and
then, when something like a disaster falls or threatens, John Bull jumps
at the sting, scenting a national insult. A brigade follows, and
Government wakes to the necessity of grappling with the situation
seriously.

But to return to the spot where the evil effects of the system were
felt, and not merely girded at. To replace and supplement the local
drafts of animals that were dying, trained Government mule corps were
sent up from the plains, properly equipped and under experienced
officers. These did excellent work, and 2,600 mules arrived in Lhasa on
August 3 in as good condition as one could wish. Of all transport
animals, the mule is the hardiest and most enduring. He does not
complain when he is overloaded, but will go on all day, and when he
drops there is no doubt that he has had enough. Nine times out of ten
when he gives up he dies. No beast is more indifferent to extremes of
heat and cold. On the road from Kamparab to Phari one day, three mules
fell over a cliff into a snowdrift, and were almost totally submerged.
Their drivers could not pull them out, and, to solve the dilemma, went
on and reported them dead. The next day an officer found them and
extricated them alive. They had been exposed to 46 deg. of frost. They still
survive.

Nothing can beat the Sircar mule when he is in good condition, unless it
is the Balti and Ladaki coolie. Several hundred of these hardy
mountaineers were imported from the North-West frontier to work on the
most dangerous and difficult sections of the road. They can bear cold
and fatigue and exposure better than any transport animal on the line,
and they are surer-footed. Mules were first employed over the Jelap, but
were afterwards abandoned for coolies. The Baltis are excellent workers
at high altitudes, and sing cheerily as they toil up the mountains with
their loads. I have seen them throw down their packs when they reached
the summit of a pass, make a rush for the shelter of a rock, and cheer
lustily like school-boys. But the coolies were not all equally
satisfactory. Those indented from the Nepal durbar were practically an
impressed gang. Twelve rupees a month with rations and warm clothing did
not seem to reconcile them to hard work, and after a month or two they
became discontented and refractory. Their officers, however, were men of
tact and decision, and they were able to prevent what might have been a
serious mutiny. The discontented ones were gradually replaced by Baltis,
Ladakis, and Garwhalis, and the coolies became the most reliable
transport corps on the line.

Thus, the whole menagerie, to use the expression current at the time,
was got into working order, and a system was gradually developed by
which the right animal, man, or conveyance was working in the right
place, and supplies were sent through at a pace that was very creditable
considering the country traversed.

From the railway base at Siliguri to Gantok, a distance of sixty miles,
the ascent in the road is scarcely perceptible. With the exception of a
few contractors' ponies, the entire carrying along this section of the
line was worked by bullock-carts. Government carts are built to carry 11
maunds (880 pounds), but contractors often load theirs with 15 or 16
maunds. As the carrying power of mules, ponies, and pack-bullocks is
only 2 maunds, it will be seen at once that transport in a mountainous
country, where there can be no road for vehicles, is nearly five times
as difficult and complicated as in the plains. And this is without
making any allowance for the inevitable mortality among transport
animals at high elevations, or taking into account the inevitable
congestion on mountain-paths, often blocked by snow, carried away by the
rains, and always too narrow to admit of any large volume of traffic.

In the beginning of March, when the line was in its best working order,
from 1,500 to 2,000 maunds were poured into Rungpo daily. Of these, only
400 or 500 maunds reached Phari; the rest was stored at Gantok or
consumed on the road. Later, when the line was extended to Gyantse, not
more than 100 maunds a day reached the front.

In the first advance on Gyantse, our column was practically launched
into the unknown. As far as we knew, no local food or forage could be
obtained. It was too early in the season for the spring pasturage. We
could not live on the country. The ever-lengthening line of
communication behind us was an artery, the severing of which would be
fatal to our advance.

One can best realize the difficulties grappled with by imagining the
extreme case of an army entering an entirely desert country. A mule, it
must be remembered, can only carry its own food for ten days. That is
to say, in a country where there is no grain or fodder, a convoy can
make at the most nine marches. On the ninth day beasts and drivers will
have consumed all the supplies taken with them. Supposing on the tenth
day no supply-base has been reached, the convoy is stranded, and can
neither advance nor retire. Nor must we forget that our imaginary
convoy, which has perished in the desert, has contributed nothing to the
advance of the army. Food and clothing for the troops, tents, bedding,
guns, ammunition, field-hospital, treasury, still await transport at the
base.

Fortunately, the country between our frontier and Lhasa is not all
desert. Yet it is barren enough to make it a matter of wonder that, with
such short preparation, we were able to push through troops to Gyantse
in April, when there was no grazing on the road, and to arrive in Lhasa
in August with a force of more than 4,000 fighting men and followers.

Before the second advance to Gyantse the spring crops had begun to
appear. Without them we could not have advanced. All other local produce
on the road was exhausted. That is to say, for 160 miles, with the
important exception of wayside fodder, we subsisted entirely on our own
supplies. The mules carried their own grain, and no more. Gyantse once
reached, the Tibetan Government granaries and stores from the
monasteries produced enough to carry us on. But besides the transport
mules, there were 100 Maxim and battery mules, as well as some 200
mounted infantry ponies, and at least 100 officers' mounts, to be fed,
and these carried nothing--contributed nothing to the stomach of the
army.

How were these beasts to be fed, and how was the whole apparatus of an
army to be carried along, when every additional transport animal
was a tax on the resources of the transport? There were two
possible solutions, each at first sight equally absurd and
impracticable:--wheeled transport in Tibet, or animals that did not
require feeding. The Supply and Transport men were resourceful and
fortunate enough to provide both. It was due to the light ekka and that
providentially ascetic beast, the yak, that we were able to reach Lhasa.

The ekkas were constructed in the plains, and carried by coolies from
the cart-road at Rungpo eighty miles over the snow passes to Kamparab on
the Phari Plain. The carrying capacity of these light carts is 400
pounds, two and a half times that of a mule, and there is only one mouth
to feed. They were the first vehicles ever seen in Tibet, and they saved
the situation.

The ekkas worked over the Phari and Tuna plains, and down the Nyang Chu
Valley as far as Kangma. They were supplemented by the yaks.

The yak is the most extraordinary animal Nature has provided the
transport officer in his need. He carries 160 pounds, and consumes
nothing. He subsists solely on stray blades of grass, tamarisk, and
tufts of lichen, that he picks up on the road. He moves slowly, and
wears a look of ineffable resignation. He is the most melancholy
disillusioned beast I have seen, and dies on the slightest provocation.
The red and white tassels and favours of cowrie-shells the Tibetans hang
about his neck are as incongruous on the poor beast as gauds and
frippery on the heroine of a tragedy.

If only he were dependable, our transport difficulties would be reduced
to a minimum. But he is not. We have seen how the four thousand died in
their passage across Sikkim without doing a day's work. Local drafts did
better. Yet I have often passed the Lieutenant in command of the corps
lamenting their lack of grit. 'Two more of my cows died this morning.
Look, there goes another! D--n the beasts! I believe they do it out of
spite!' And the chief Supply and Transport officer, always a humorist in
adversity, when asked why they were dying off every day, said: 'I think
it must be due to overfeeding.' But we owe much to the yak.

The final advance from Gyantse to Lhasa was a comparatively easy matter.
Crops were plentiful, and large supplies of grain were obtained from the
monasteries and jongs on the road. We found, contrary to anticipation,
that the produce in this part of Tibet was much greater than the
consumption. In many places we found stores that would last a village
three or four years. Our transport animals lived on the country. We
arrived at Lhasa with 2,600 mules and 400 coolies. The yak and donkey
corps were left at the river for convoy work. It would have been
impossible to have pushed through in the winter.

All the produce we consumed on the road was paid for. In this way the
expense of the army's keep fell on the Lhasa Government, who had to pay
the indemnity, and our presence in the country was not directly, at any
rate, a burden on the agricultural population of the villages through
which we passed.

Looking back on the splendid work accomplished by the transport, it is
difficult to select any special phase more memorable than another. The
complete success of the organization and the endurance and grit
displayed by officers and men are equally admirable. I could cite the
coolness of a single officer in a mob of armed and mutinous coolies,
when the compelling will of one man and a few blows straight from the
shoulder kept the discontented harnessed to their work and quelled a
revolt; or the case of another who drove his diseased yaks over the snow
passes into Chumbi, and after two days' rest started with a fresh corps
on ten months of the most tedious labour the mind of man can imagine,
rising every day before daybreak in an almost Arctic cold, traversing
the same featureless tablelands, and camping out at night cheerfully in
the open plain with his escort of thirty rifles. There was always the
chance of a night attack, but no other excitement to break the eternal
monotony. But it was all in the day's work, and the subaltern took it
like a picnic. Another supreme test of endurance in man and beast were
the convoys between Chumbi and Tuna in the early part of the year, which
for hardships endured remind me of Skobeleff's dash through the Balkans
on Adrianople. Only our labours were protracted, Skobeleff's the
struggle of a few days. Even in mid-March a convoy of the 12th Mule
Corps, escorted by two companies of the 23rd Pioneers, were overtaken by
a blizzard on their march between Phari and Tuna, and camped in two feet
of snow with the thermometer 18 deg. below zero. A driving hurricane made it
impossible to light a fire or cook food. The officers were reduced to
frozen bully beef and neat spirits, while the sepoys went without food
for thirty-six hours. The fodder for the mules was buried deep in snow.
The frozen flakes blowing through the tents cut like a knife. While the
detachment was crossing a stream, the mules fell through the ice, and
were only extricated with great difficulty. The drivers arrived at Tuna
frozen to the waist. Twenty men of the 12th Mule Corps were frostbitten,
and thirty men of the 23rd Pioneers were so incapacitated that they had
to be carried in on mules. On the same day there were seventy cases of
snow-blindness among the 8th Gurkhas.

Until late in April all the plain was intersected by frozen streams.
Blankets were stripped from the mules to make a pathway for them over
the ice. Often they went without water at night, and at mid-day, when
the surface of the ice was melted, their thirst was so great that many
died from overdrinking.

Had the Tibetans attacked us in January, they would have taken us at a
great disadvantage. The bolts of our rifles jammed with frozen oil. Oil
froze in the Maxims, and threw them out of gear. More often than not the
mounted infantry found the butts of their rifles frozen in the buckets,
and had to dismount and use both hands to extricate them.

I think these men who took the convoys through to Tuna; the 23rd, who
wintered there and supplied most of the escort; and the 8th Gurkhas, who
cut a road in the frost-bound plain, may be said to have broken the back
of the resistance to our advance. They were the pioneers, and the troops
who followed in spring and summer little realized what they owed to
them.

The great difficulties we experienced in pushing through supplies to
Tuna, which is less than 150 miles from our base railway-station at
Siliguri, show the absurdity of the idea of a Russian advance on Lhasa.
The nearest Russian outpost is over 1,000 miles distant, and the country
to be traversed is even more barren and inhospitable than on our
frontier.

Up to the present the route to Chumbi has been via Siliguri and the
Jelap and Nathu Passes, but the natural outlet of the valley is by the
Ammo Chu, which flows through Bhutan into the Dooars, where it becomes
the Torsa. The Bengal-Dooars Railway now extends to Madhari Hat, fifteen
miles from the point where the Torsa crosses the frontier, whence it is
only forty-eight miles as the crow flies to Rinchengong in the Chumbi
Valley. When the projected Ammo Chu cart-road is completed, all the
difficulty of carrying stores into Chumbi will be obviated. Engineers
are already engaged on the first trace, and the road will be in working
order within a few months. It avoids all snow passes, and nowhere
reaches an elevation of more than 9,000 feet. The direct route will
shorten the journey to Chumbi by several days, bring Lhasa within a
month's journey of Calcutta, and considerably improve trade facilities
between Tibet and India.




CHAPTER VI

THE ACTION AT THE HOT SPRINGS


The village of Tuna, which lies at the foot of bare yellow hills,
consists of a few deserted houses. The place is used mainly as a
halting-stage by the Tibetans. The country around is sterile and
unproductive, and wood is a luxury that must be carried from a distance
of nearly fifty miles.

It was in these dismal surroundings that Colonel Younghusband's mission
spent the months of January, February, and March. The small garrison
suffered all the discomforts of Phari. The dirt and grime of the squalid
little houses became so depressing that they pitched their tents in an
open courtyard, preferring the numbing cold to the filth of the Tibetan
hovels. Many of the sepoys fell victims to frost-bite and pneumonia, and
nearly every case of pneumonia proved fatal, the patient dying of
suffocation owing to the rarefied air.

Colonel Younghusband had not been at Tuna many days before it became
clear that there could be no hope of a peaceful solution. The Tibetans
began to gather in large numbers at Guru, eight miles to the east, on
the road to Lhasa. The Depon, or Lhasa General, whom Colonel
Younghusband met on two occasions, repeated that he was only empowered
to treat on condition that we withdrew to Yatung. Messages were sent
from the Tibetan camp to Tuna almost daily asking us to retire, and
negociations again came to a deadlock. After a month the tone of the
Tibetans became minatory. They threatened to invest our camp, and an
attack was expected on March 1, the Tibetan New Year. The Lamas,
however, thought better of it. They held a Commination Service instead,
and cursed us solemnly for five days, hoping, no doubt, that the British
force would dwindle away by the act of God. Nobody was 'one penny the
worse.'

Though we made no progress with the Tibetans during this time, Colonel
Younghusband utilized the halt at Tuna in cementing a friendship with
Bhutan. The neutrality of the Bhutanese in the case of a war with Tibet
was a matter of the utmost importance. Were these people unfriendly or
disposed to throw in their lot with their co-religionists, the Tibetans,
our line of communications would be exposed to a flank attack along the
whole of the Tuna Plain, which is conterminous with the Bhutan frontier,
as well as a rear attack anywhere in the Chumbi Valley as far south as
Rinchengong. The Bhutanese are men of splendid physique, brave, warlike,
and given to pillage. Their hostility would have involved the despatch
of a second force, as large as that sent to Tibet, and might have
landed us, if unprepared, in a serious reverse. The complete success of
Colonel Younghusband's diplomacy was a great relief to the Indian
Government, who were waiting with some anxiety to see what attitude the
Bhutanese would adopt. Having secured from them assurances of their good
will, Colonel Younghusband put their friendship to immediate test by
broaching the subject of the Ammo Chu route to Chumbi through Bhutanese
territory. Very little time was lost before the concession was obtained
from the Tongsa Penlop, ruler of Bhutan, who himself accompanied the
mission as far as Lhasa in the character of mediator between the Dalai
Lama and the British Government. The importance of the Ammo Chu route in
our future relations with Tibet I have emphasized elsewhere.

I doubt if ever an advance was more welcome to waiting troops than that
which led to the engagement at the Hot Springs.

For months, let it be remembered, we had been marking time. When a move
had to be made to escort a convoy, it was along narrow mountain-paths,
where the troops had to march in single file. There was no possibility
of an attack this side of Phari. The ground covered was familiar and
monotonous. One felt cooped in, and was thoroughly bored and tired of
the delay, so that when General Macdonald marched out of Phari with his
little army in three columns, a feeling of exhilaration communicated
itself to the troops.

Here was elbow-room at last, and an open plain, where all the army corps
of Europe might manoeuvre. At Tuna, on the evening of the 29th, it was
given out in orders that a reconnaissance in force was to be made the
next morning, and two companies of the 32nd Pioneers would be left at
Guru. The Tibetan camp at the Hot Springs lay right across our line of
march, and the hill that flanked it was lined with their sangars. They
must either fight or retire. Most of us thought that the Tibetans would
fade away in the mysterious manner they have, and build another futile
wall further on. The extraordinary affair that followed must be a unique
event in military history.

The morning of the 30th was bitterly cold. An icy wind was blowing, and
snow was lying on the ground. I put on my thick sheepskin for the first
time for two months, and I owe my life to it.

About an hour after leaving Tuna, two or three Tibetan messengers rode
out from their camp to interview Colonel Younghusband. They got down
from their ponies and began chattering in a very excited manner, like a
flock of frightened parrots. It was evident to us, not understanding the
language, that they were entreating us to go back, and the constant
reference to Yatung told us that they were repeating the message that
had been sent into the Tuna camp almost daily during the past few
months--that if we retired to Yatung the Dalai Lama would send an
accredited envoy to treat with us. Being met with the usual answer,
they mounted dejectedly and rode off at a gallop to their camp.

Soon after they had disappeared another group of horsemen were seen
riding towards us. These proved to be the Lhasa Depon, accompanied by an
influential Lama and a small escort armed with modern rifles. The rifles
were naturally inspected with great interest. They were of different
patterns--Martini-Henri, Lee-Metford, Snider--but the clumsily-painted
stocks alone were enough to show that they were shoddy weapons of native
manufacture. They left no mark on our troops.

According to Tibetan custom, a rug was spread on the ground for the
interview between Colonel Younghusband and the Lhasa Depon, who
conferred sitting down. Captain O'Connor, the secretary of the mission,
interpreted. The Lhasa Depon repeated the entreaty of the messengers,
and said that there would be trouble if we proceeded. Colonel
Younghusband's reply was terse and to the point.

'Tell him,' he said to Captain O'Connor, 'that we have been negociating
with Tibet for fifteen years; that I myself have been waiting for eight
months to meet responsible representatives from Lhasa, and that the
mission is now going on to Gyantse. Tell him that we have no wish to
fight, and that he would be well advised if he ordered his soldiers to
retire. Should they remain blocking our path, I will ask General
Macdonald to remove them.'

The Lhasa Depon was greatly perturbed. He said that he had no wish to
fight, and would try and stop his men firing upon us. But before he left
he again tried to induce Colonel Younghusband to turn back. Then he rode
away to join his men. What orders he gave them will never be known.

I do not think the Tibetans ever believed in our serious intention to
advance. No doubt they attributed our evacuation of Khamba Jong and our
long delay in Chumbi to weakness and vacillation. And our forbearance
since the negociations of 1890 must have lent itself to the same
interpretation.

As we advanced we could see the Tibetans running up the hill to the left
to occupy the sangars. To turn their position, General Macdonald
deployed the 8th Gurkhas to the crest of the ridge; at the same time the
Pioneers, the Maxim detachment of the Norfolks, and Mountain Battery
were deployed on the right until the Tibetan position was surrounded.

The manoeuvre was completely successful. The Tibetans on the hill,
finding themselves outflanked by the Gurkhas, ran down to the cover of
the wall by the main camp, and the whole mob was encircled by our
troops.

It was on this occasion that the Sikhs and Gurkhas displayed that
coolness and discipline which won them a European reputation. They had
orders not to fire unless they were fired upon, and they walked right
up to the walls of the sangars until the muzzles and prongs of the
Tibetan matchlocks were almost touching their chests. The Tibetans
stared at our men for a moment across the wall, and then turned and
shambled down sulkily to join their comrades in the redan.

No one dreamed of the sanguinary action that was impending. I
dismounted, and hastily scribbled a despatch on my saddle to the effect
that the Tibetan position had been taken without a shot being fired. The
mounted orderly who carried the despatch bore a similar message from the
mission to the Foreign Office. Then the disarming began. The Tibetans
were told that if they gave up their arms they would be allowed to go
off unmolested. But they did not wish to give up their arms. It was a
ridiculous position, Sikh and Mongol swaying backwards and forwards as
they wrestled for the possession of swords and matchlocks. Perhaps the
humour of it made one careless of the underlying danger. Accounts differ
as to how this wrestling match developed into war, how, to the delight
of the troops, the toy show became the 'real thing.' Of one thing I am
certain, that a rush was made in the south-east corner before a shot was
fired. If there had been any firing, I would not have been wandering
about by the Tibetan flank without a revolver in my hand. As it was, my
revolver was buried in the breast pocket of my Norfolk jacket under my
poshteen.

I have no excuse for this folly except a misplaced contempt for Tibetan
arms and courage--a contempt which accounted for our only serious
casualty in the affair of 1888.[12] Also I think there was in the margin
of my consciousness a feeling that one individual by an act of rashness
might make himself responsible for the lives of hundreds. Hemmed in as
the Tibetans were, no one gave them credit for the spirit they showed,
or imagined that they would have the folly to resist. But we had to deal
with the most ignorant and benighted people on earth, most of whom must
have thought our magazine rifles and Maxims as harmless as their own
obsolete matchlocks, and believed that they bore charms by which they
were immune from death.

  [12] When Colonel Bromhead pursued a Tibetan unarmed. Called upon to
      surrender, the Tibetan turned on Colonel Bromhead, cut off his
      right arm, and badly mutilated the left.

The attack on the south-east corner was so sudden that the first man was
on me before I had time to draw my revolver.[13] He came at me with his
sword lifted in both hands over his head. He had a clear run of ten
yards, and if I had not ducked and caught him by the knees he must have
smashed my skull open. I threw him, and he dragged me to the ground.
Trying to rise, I was struck on the temple by a second swordsman, and
the blade glanced off my skull. I received the rest of my wounds, save
one or two, on my hands--as I lay on my face I used them to protect my
head. After a time the blows ceased; my assailants were all shot down or
had fled. I lay absolutely still for a while until I thought it safe to
raise my head. Then I looked round, and, seeing no Tibetans near in an
erect position, I got up and walked out of the ring between the rifles
of the Sikhs. The firing line had been formed in the meantime on a mound
about thirty yards behind me, and I had been exposed to the bullets of
our own men from two sides, as well as the promiscuous fire of the
Tibetans.

  [13] The reports sent home at the time of the Hot Springs affair were
      inaccurate as to the manner in which I was wounded, and also
      Major Wallace Dunlop, who was the only European anywhere near me
      at the time. Major Dunlop shot his own man, but at such close
      quarters that the Tibetan's sword slipped down the barrel of his
      rifle and cut off two fingers of his left hand. General Macdonald
      and Captain Bignell, who shot several men with their revolvers,
      were standing at the corner where the wall joined the ruined
      house, and did not see the attack on myself and Dunlop.

The Tibetans could not have chosen a spot more fatal for their stand--a
bluff hill to the north, a marsh and stream on the east, and to the west
a stone wall built across the path, which they had to scale in their
attempted assault on General Macdonald and his escort. Only one man got
over. Inside there was barely an acre of ground, packed so thickly with
seething humanity that the cross-fire which the Pioneers poured in
offered little danger to their own men.

The Lhasa General must have fired off his revolver after I was struck
down. I cannot credit the rumour that his action was a signal for a
general attack, and that the Tibetans allowed themselves to be herded
together as a ruse to get us at close quarters. To begin with, the
demand that they should give up their arms, and the assurance that they
might go off unmolested, must have been quite unexpected by them, and I
doubt if they realized the advantage of an attack at close quarters.

My own impression is that the shot was the act of a desperate man,
ignorant and regardless of what might ensue. To return to Lhasa with his
army disarmed and disbanded, and without a shot having been fired, must
have meant ruin to him, and probably death. When we reached Gyantse we
heard that his property had been confiscated from his family on account
of his failure to prevent our advance.

The Depon was a man of fine presence and bearing. I only saw him once,
in his last interview with Colonel Younghusband, but I cannot dissociate
from him a personal courage and a pride that must have rankled at the
indignity of his position. Probably he knew that his shot was suicidal.

The action has been described as one of extreme folly. But what was left
him if he lived except shame and humiliation? And what Englishman with
the same prospect to face, caught in this dark eddy of circumstance,
would not have done the same thing? He could only fire, and let his men
take their chance, God help them!

And the rabble? They have been called treacherous. Why, I don't know.
They were mostly impressed peasants. They did not wish to give up their
arms. Why should they? They knew nothing of the awful odds against them.
They were being hustled by white men who did not draw knives or fire
guns. Amid that babel of 1,500 men, many of them may not have heard the
command; they may not have believed that their lives would have been
spared.

Looking back on the affair with all the sanity of experience, nothing is
more natural than what happened. It was folly and suicide, no doubt; but
it was human nature. They were not going to give in without having a
fling. I hope I shall not be considered a pro-Tibetan when I say that I
admire their gallantry and dash.

As my wounds were being dressed I peered over the mound at the rout.
They were walking away! Why, in the name of all their Bodhisats and
Munis, did they not run? There was cover behind a bend in the hill a few
hundred yards distant, and they were exposed to a devastating hail of
bullets from the Maxims and rifles, that seemed to mow down every third
or fourth man. Yet they walked!

It was the most extraordinary procession I have ever seen. My friends
have tried to explain the phenomenon as due to obstinacy or ignorance,
or Spartan contempt for life. But I think I have the solution. They
were bewildered. The impossible had happened.

Prayers, and charms, and mantras, and the holiest of their holy men, had
failed them. I believe they were obsessed with that one thought. They
walked with bowed heads, as if they had been disillusioned in their
gods.

After the last of the retiring Tibetans had disappeared round the corner
of the Guru road, the 8th Gurkhas descended from the low range of hills
on the right of the position, and crossed the Guru Plain in extended
order with the 2nd Mounted Infantry on their extreme left. Orders were
then received by Major Row, commanding the detachment, to take the left
of the two houses which were situated under the hills at the further
side of the plain. This movement was carried out in conjunction with the
mounted infantry. The advance was covered by the 7-pounder guns of the
Gurkhas under Captain Luke, R.A. The attacking force advanced in
extended order by a series of small rushes. Cover was scanty, but the
Tibetans, though firing vigorously, fired high, and there were no
casualties. At last the force reached the outer wall of the house, and
regained breath under cover of it. A few men of the Gurkhas then climbed
on to the roof and descended into the house, making prisoners of the
inmates, who numbered forty or fifty. Shortly afterwards the door, which
was strongly barricaded, was broken in, and the remainder of the force
entered the house.

During the advance a number of the Tibetans attempted to escape on mules
and ponies, but the greater number of these were followed up and killed.
The Tibetan casualties were at least 700.

Perhaps no British victory has been greeted with less enthusiasm than
the action at the Hot Springs. Certainly the officers, who did their
duty so thoroughly, had no heart in the business at all. After the first
futile rush the Tibetans made no further resistance. There was no more
fighting, only the slaughter of helpless men.

It is easy to criticise after the event, but it seems to me that the
only way to have avoided the lamentable affair at the Hot Springs would
have been to have drawn up more troops round the redan, and, when the
Tibetans were hemmed in with the cliff in their rear, to have given them
at least twenty minutes to lay down their arms. In the interval the
situation might have been made clear to everyone. If after the
time-limit they still hesitated, two shots might have brought them to
reason. Then, if they were mad enough to decide on resistance, their
suicide would be on their own heads. But to send two dozen sepoys into
that sullen mob to take away their arms was to invite disaster. Given
the same circumstances, and any mob in the world of men, women, or
children, civilized or savage, and there would be found at least one
rash spirit to explode the mine and set a spark to a general
conflagration.

It was thought at the time that the lesson would save much future
bloodshed. But the Tibetan is so stubborn and convinced of his
self-sufficiency that it took many lessons to teach him the disparity
between his armed rabble and the resources of the British Raj. In the
light of after-events it is clear that we could have made no progress
without inflicting terrible punishment. The slaughter at Guru only
forestalled the inevitable. We were drawn into the vortex of war by the
Tibetans' own folly. There was no hope of their regarding the British as
a formidable Power, and a force to be reckoned with, until we had killed
several thousand of their men.

After the action the Tibetan wounded were brought into Tuna, and an
abandoned dwelling-house was fitted up as a hospital. An empty cowshed
outside served as an operating-theatre. The patients showed
extraordinary hardihood and stoicism. After the Dzama Tang engagement
many of the wounded came in riding on yaks from a distance of fifty or
sixty miles. They were consistently cheerful, and always ready to
appreciate a joke. One man, who lost both legs, said: 'In my next battle
I must be a hero, as I cannot run away.' Some of the wounded were
terribly mutilated by shell. Two men who were shot through the brain,
and two who were shot through the lungs, survived. For two days
Lieutenant Davys, Indian Medical Service, was operating nearly all day.
I think the Tibetans were really impressed with our humanity, and looked
upon Davys as some incarnation of a medicine Buddha. They never
hesitated to undergo operations, did not flinch at pain, and took
chloroform without fear. Their recuperative power was marvellous. Of the
168 who were received in hospital, only 20 died; 148 were sent to their
homes on hired yaks cured. Everyone who visited the hospital at Tuna
left it with an increased respect for the Tibetans.

       *       *       *       *       *

Three months after the action I found the Tibetans still lying where
they fell. One shot through the shoulder in retreat had spun as he fell
facing our rifles. Another tore at the grass with futile fingers through
which a delicate pink primula was now blossoming. Shrunk arms and shanks
looked hideously dwarfish. By the stream the bodies lay in heaps with
parched skin, like mummies, rusty brown. A knot of coarse black hair,
detached from a skull, was circling round in an eddy of wind. Everything
had been stripped from the corpses save here and there a wisp of cloth,
looking more grim than the nakedness it covered, or round the neck some
inexpensive charm, which no one had thought worth taking for its occult
powers. Nature, more kindly, had strewn round them beautiful spring
flowers--primulas, buttercups, potentils. The stream 'bubbled oilily,'
and in the ruined house bees were swarming.

Ten miles beyond the Springs an officer was watering his horse in the
Bamtso Lake. The beast swung round trembling, with eyes astare. Among
the weeds lay the last victim.




CHAPTER VII

A HUMAN MISCELLANY


The Tibetans stood on the roofs of their houses like a row of
cormorants, and watched the doolie pass underneath. At a little distance
it was hard to distinguish the children, so motionless were they, from
the squat praying-flags wrapped in black skin and projecting from the
parapets of the roof. The very babes were impassive and inscrutable.
Beside them perched ravens of an ebony blackness, sleek and well
groomed, and so consequential that they seemed the most human element of
the group.

My Tibetan bearers stopped to converse with a woman on the roof who wore
a huge red hoop in her hair, which was matted and touzled like a
negress's. A child behind was searching it, with apparent success. The
woman asked a question, and the bearers jerked out a few guttural
monosyllables, which she received with indifference. She was not visibly
elated when she heard that the doolie contained the first victim of the
Tibetan arms. I should like to have heard her views on the political
situation and the question of a settlement. Some of her relatives,
perhaps, were killed in the melee at the Hot Springs. Others who had
been taken prisoners might be enlisted in the new doolie corps, and
receiving an unexpected wage; others, perhaps, were wounded and being
treated in our hospitals with all the skill and resources of modern
science; or they were bringing in food-stuffs for our troops, or setting
booby-traps for them, and lying in wait behind sangars to snipe them in
the Red Idol Gorge.

The bearers started again; the hot sun and the continued exertion made
them stink intolerably. Every now and then they put down the doolie, and
began discussing their loot--ear-rings and charms, rough turquoises and
ruby-coloured stones, torn from the bodies of the dead and wounded. For
the moment I was tired of Tibet.

I remembered another exodus when I was disgusted with the country. I had
been allured across the Himalayas by the dazzling purity of the snows. I
had escaped the Avernus of the plains, and I might have been content,
but there was the seduction of the snows. I had gained an upper story,
but I must climb on to the roof. Every morning the Sun-god threw open
the magnificent portals of his domain, dazzling rifts and spires, black
cliffs glacier-bitten, the flawless vaulted roof of Kinchenjunga--

    'Myriads of topaz lights and jacinth work
      Of subtlest jewellery.'

One morning the roof of the Sun-god's palace was clear and cloudless,
but about its base hung little clouds of snow-dust, as though the
Olympians had been holding tourney, and the dust had risen in the tracks
of their chariots. All this was seen over galvanized iron roofs. The
Sun-god had thrown open his palace, and we were playing pitch and toss
on the steps. While I was so engrossed I looked up. Columns of white
cloud were rising to obscure the entrance. Then a sudden shaft of
sunlight broke the fumes. There was a vivid flash, a dazzle of
jewel-work, and the portals closed. I was covered with bashfulness and
shame. It was a direct invitation. I made some excuse to my companion,
said I had an engagement, went straight to my rooms, and packed.

But while the aroma of my carriers insulted the pure air, and their
chatter over their tawdry spoil profaned the silent precincts of
Chumulari, their mountain goddess, I thought more of the disenchantment
of that earlier visit. I remembered sitting on a hillside near a
lamasery, which was surrounded by a small village of Lamas' houses.
Outside the temple a priest was operating on a yak for vaccine. He had
bored a large hole in the shoulder, into which he alternately buried his
forearm and squirted hot water copiously. A hideous yellow trickle
beneath indicated that the poor beast was entirely perforated. A crowd
of admiring little boys and girls looked on with relish. The smell of
the poor yak was distressing, but the smell of the Lama was worse. I
turned away in disgust--turned my back contentedly and without regret on
the mysterious land and the road to the Forbidden City. At that moment,
if the Dalai Lama himself had sent me a chaise with a dozen outriders
and implored me to come, I would not have visited him, not for a
thousand yaks. The scales of vagabondage fell from my eyes; the spirit
of unrest died within me. I had a longing for fragrant soap, snowy white
linen, fresh-complexioned ladies and clean-shaven, well-groomed men.

And here again I was returning very slowly to civilization; but I was
coming back with half an army corps to shake the Dalai Lama on his
throne--or if there were no throne or Dalai Lama, to do what? I wondered
if the gentlemen sitting snugly in Downing Street had any idea.

At Phari I was snow-bound for a week, and there were no doolie-bearers.
The Darjeeling dandy-wallahs were no doubt at the front, where they were
most wanted, as the trained army doolie corps are plainsmen, who can
barely breathe, much less work, at these high elevations. At last we
secured some Bhutias who were returning to the front.

The Bhutia is a type I have long known, though not in the capacity of
bearer. These men regarded the doolie with the invalid inside as a piece
of baggage that had to be conveyed from one camp to another, no matter
how. Of the art of their craft they knew nothing, but they battled with
the elements so stoutly that one forgave them their awkwardness. They
carried me along mountain-paths so slippery that a mule could find no
foothold, through snow so deep and clogging that with all their toil
they could make barely half a mile an hour; and they took shelter once
from a hailstorm in which exposure without thick head-covering might
have been fatal. Often they dropped the doolie, sometimes on the edge of
a precipice, in places where one perspired with fright; they collided
quite unnecessarily with stones and rocks; but they got through, and
that was the main point. Men who have carried a doolie over a difficult
mountain-pass (14,350 feet), slipping and stumbling through snow and ice
in the face of a hurricane of wind, deserve well of the great Raj which
they serve.

On the road into Darjeeling, owing to the absence of trained
doolie-bearers, I met a human miscellany that I am not likely to forget.
Eight miles beyond the Jelap lies the fort of Gnatong, whence there is a
continual descent to the plains of India. The neighbouring hills and
valleys had been searched for men; high wages were offered, and at last
from some remote village in Sikkim came a dozen weedy Lepchas, simian in
appearance, and of uncouth speech, who understood no civilized tongue.
They had never seen a doolie, but in default of better they were
employed. It was nobody's fault; bearers must be had, and the
profession was unpopular. I was their 'first job.' I settled myself
comfortably, all unconscious of my impending fate. They started off with
a wild whoop, threw the doolie up in the air, caught it on their
shoulders, and played cup and ball with the contents until they were
tired. I swore at them in Spanish, English, and Hindustani, but it was
small relief, as they didn't take the slightest notice, and I had
neither hands to beat them nor feet to kick them over the _khud_. My
orderly followed and told them in a mild North-Country accent that they
would be punished if they did it again; there is some absurd army
regulation about British soldiers striking followers. For all they knew,
he was addressing the stars. They dropped the thing a dozen times in ten
miles, and thought it the hugest joke in the world. I shall shy at a
hospital doolie for the rest of my natural life.

There is a certain Mongol smell which is the most unpleasant human odour
I know. It is common to Lepchas, Bhutanese, and Tibetans, but it is
found in its purest essence in these low-country, cross-bred Lepchas,
who were my close companions for two days. When we reached the heat of
the valley, they jumped into the stream and bathed, but they emerged
more unsavoury than ever. It was a relief to pass a dead mule. At the
next village they got drunk, after which they developed an amazing
surefootedness, and carried me in without mishap.

After two days with my Lepchas we reached Rungli (2,000 feet), whence
the road to the plains is almost level. Here a friend introduced me to a
Jemadar in a Gurkha regiment.

'He writes all about our soldiers and the fighting in Tibet,' he said.
'It all goes home to England on the telegraph-wire, and people at home
are reading what he says an hour or two after he has given _khubber_ to
the office here.'

'Oh yes,' said the Jemadar in Hindustani, 'and if things are well the
people in England will be very glad; and if we are ill and die, and
there is too much cold, they will be very sorry.'

The Jemadar smiled. He was most sincere and sympathetic. If an
Englishman had said the same thing, he would have been thought
half-witted, but Orientals have a way of talking platitudes as if they
were epigrams.

The Jemadar's speech was so much to the point that it called up a little
picture in my mind of the London Underground and a liveried official
dealing out _Daily Mails_ to crowds of inquirers anxious for news of
Tibet. Only the sun blazed overhead and the stream made music at our
feet.

I left the little rest-hut in the morning, resigned to the inevitable
jolting, and expecting another promiscuous collection of humanity to do
duty as _kahars_. But, to my great joy, I found twelve Lucknow
doolie-wallahs waiting by the veranda, lithe and erect, and part of a
drilled corps. Drill discipline is good, but in the art of their trade
these men needed no teaching. For centuries their ancestors had carried
palanquins in the plains, bearing Rajas and ladies of high estate,
perhaps even the Great Mogul himself. The running step to their strange
rhythmic chants must be an instinct to them. That morning I knew my
troubles were at an end. They started off with steps of velvet,
improvising as they went a kind of plaintive song like an intoned
litany.

The leading man chanted a dimeter line, generally with an iambus in the
first foot; but when the road was difficult or the ascent toilsome, the
metre became trochaic, in accordance with the best traditions of
classical poetry. The hind-men responded with a sing-song trochaic
dimeter which sounded like a long-drawn-out monosyllable. They never
initiated anything. It was not custom; it had never been done. The laws
of Nature are not so immutable as the ritual of a Hindu guild.

We sped on smoothly for eight miles, and when I asked the _kahars_ if
they were tired, they said they would not rest, as relays were waiting
on the road. All the way they chanted their hymn of the obvious:--

    'Mountains are steep;
          _Chorus_: Yes, they are.
    The road is narrow;
          Yes, it is.
    The sahib is wounded;
          That is so.
    With many wounds;
          They are many.
    The road goes down;
          Yes, it does.
    Now we are hurrying;
          Yes, we are.'

Here they ran swiftly till the next rise in the hill.

Waiting in the shade for relays, I heard two Englishmen meet on the
road. One had evidently been attached, and was going down to join his
regiment; the other was coming up on special service. I caught fragments
of our crisp expressive argot.

_Officer going down_ (_apparently disillusioned_): 'Oh, it's the same
old bald-headed maidan we usually muddle into.'

_Officer coming up_: '... Up above Phari ideal country for native
cavalry, isn't it?... A few men with lances prodding those fellows in
the back would soon put the fear of God into them. Why don't they send
up the --th Light Cavalry?'

_Officer going down_: 'They've Walers, and you can't feed 'em, and the
--th are all Jats. They're no good; can't do without a devil of a lot of
milk. They want bucketsful of it. Well, bye-bye; you'll soon get fed up
with it.'

The doolie was hitched up, and the _kahars_ resumed their chant:

    'A sahib goes up;
          Yes, he does.
    A sahib goes down;
          That is so.'

The heat and the monotonous cadence induced drowsiness, and one fell to
thinking of this odd motley of men, all of one genus, descended from the
anthropoid ape, and exhibiting various phases of evolution--the
primitive Lepcha, advanced little further than his domestic dog; the
Tibetan _kahar_ caught in the wheel of civilization, and forming part of
the mechanism used to bring his own people into line; the Lucknow
doolie-bearer and the Jemadar Sahib, products of a hoary civilization
that have escaped complexity and nerves; and lord of all these, by
virtue of his race, the most evolved, the English subaltern. All these
folk are brought together because the people on the other side of the
hills will insist on being obsolete anachronisms, who have been asleep
for hundreds of years while we have been developing the sense of our
duty towards our neighbour. They must come into line; it is the will of
the most evolved.

The next day I was carried for miles through a tropical forest. The damp
earth sweated in the sun after last night's thunder-storm, and the
vegetation seemed to grow visibly in the steaming moisture. Gorgeous
butterflies, the epicures of a season, came out to indulge a love of
sunshine and suck nectar from all this profusion. Overhead, birds
shrieked and whistled and beat metal, and did everything but sing. The
cicadas raised a deafening din in praise of their Maker, seeming to
think, in their natural egoism, that He had made the forest, oak, and
gossamer for their sakes. We were not a thousand feet above the sea.
Thousands of feet above us, where we were camping a day or two ago, our
troops were marching through snow.

The next morning we crossed the Tista River, and the road led up through
sal forests to a tea-garden at 3,500 feet. Here we entered the most
perfect climate in the world, and I enjoyed genial hospitality and a
foretaste of civilization: a bed, sheets, a warm bath, clean linen,
fruit, sparkling soda, a roomy veranda with easy-chairs, and outside
roses and trellis-work, and a garden bright with orchids and
wild-turmeric and a profusion of semi-tropical and English flowers--all
the things which the spoilt children of civilization take as a matter of
course, because they have never slept under the stars, or known what it
is to be hungry and cold, or exhausted by struggling against the forces
of untamed Nature.

At noon next day, in the cantonments at Jelapahar, an officer saw a
strange sight--a field-hospital doolie with the red cross, and twelve
_kahars_, Lucknow men, whose plaintive chant must have recalled old days
on the North-West frontier. Behind on a mule rode a British orderly of
the King's Own Scottish Borderers, bearded and weather-stained, and
without a trace of the spick-and-spanness of cantonments. I saw the
officer's face lighten; he became visibly excited; he could not restrain
himself--he swung round, rode after my orderly, and began to question
him without shame. Here was civilization longing for the wilderness, and
over there, beyond the mist, under that snow-clad peak, were men in the
wilderness longing for civilization.

A cloud swept down and obscured the Jelap, as if the chapter were
closed. But it is not. That implacable barrier must be crossed again,
and then, when we have won the most secret places of the earth, we may
cry with Burton and his Arabs, 'Voyaging is victory!'




CHAPTER VIII

THE ADVANCE OF THE MISSION OPPOSED


The intention of the Tibetans at the Hot Springs has not been made
clear. They say that their orders were to oppose our advance, but to
avoid a battle, just as our orders were to take away their arms, if
possible, without firing a shot. The muddle that ensued lends itself to
several interpretations, and the Tibetans ascribe their loss to British
treachery. They say that we ordered them to destroy the fuses of their
matchlocks, and then fired on them. This story was taken to Lhasa, with
the result that the new levies from the capital were not deterred by the
terrible punishment inflicted on their comrades. Orders were given to
oppose us on the road to Gyantse, and an armed force, which included
many of the fugitives from Guru, gathered about Kangma.

The peace delegates always averred that we fired the first shot at Guru.
But even if we give the Tibetans the benefit of the doubt, and admit
that the action grew out of the natural excitement of two forces
struggling for arms, both of whom were originally anxious to avoid a
conflict, there is still no doubt that the responsibility of continuing
the hostilities lies with the Tibetans.

On the morning of April 7 ten scouts of the 2nd Mounted Infantry, under
Captain Peterson, found the Tibetans occupying the village of Samando,
seventeen miles beyond Kalatso. As our men had orders not to fire or
provoke an attack, they sent a messenger up to the walls to ask one of
the Tibetans to come out and parley. They said they would send for a
man, and invited us to come nearer. When we had ridden up to within a
hundred yards of the village, they opened a heavy fire on us with their
matchlocks. Our scouts spread out, rode back a few hundred yards, and
took cover behind stones. Not a man or pony was hit. Before retiring,
the mounted infantry fired a few volleys at the Tibetans who were lining
the roofs of two large houses and a wall that connected them, their
heads only appearing above the low turf parapets. Twice the Tibetans
sent off a mounted man for reinforcements, but our shooting was so good
that each time the horse returned riderless. The next morning we found
the village unoccupied, and discovered six dead left on the roofs, most
of whom were wounded about the chest. Our bullets had penetrated the two
feet of turf and killed the man behind. Putting aside the question of
Guru, the Samando affair was the first overt act of hostility directed
against the mission.

After Samando there was no longer any doubt that the Tibetans intended
to oppose our advance. On the 8th the mounted infantry discovered a wall
built across the valley and up the hills just this side of Kangma, which
they reported as occupied by about 1,000 men. As it was too late to
attack that night, we formed camp. The next morning we found the wall
evacuated, and the villagers reported that the Tibetans had retired to
the gorge below. This habit of building formidable barriers across a
valley, stretching from crest to crest of the flanking hills, is a
well-known trait of Tibetan warfare. The wall is often built in the
night and abandoned the next morning. One would imagine that, after
toiling all night to make a strong position, the Tibetans would hold
their wall if they intended to make a stand anywhere. But they do not
grudge the labour. Wall-building is an instinct with them. When a
Tibetan sees two stones by the roadside, he cannot resist placing one on
the top of the other. So wherever one goes the whole countryside is
studded with these monuments of wasted labour, erected to propitiate the
genii of the place, or from mere force of habit to while away an idle
hour. During the campaign of 1888 it was this practice of strengthening
and abandoning positions more than anything else which gained the
Tibetans the reputation of cowardice, which they have since shown to be
totally undeserved.

On April 8, owing to the delay in reconnoitring the wall, we made only
about eight miles, and camped. The next morning we had marched about
two miles, when we found the high ridge on the left flank occupied by
the enemy, and the mounted infantry reported them in the gorge beyond.
Two companies of the 8th Gurkhas under Major Row were sent up to the
hill on the left to turn the enemy's right flank, and the mountain
battery (No. 7) came into action on the right at over 3,000 yards. The
enemy kept up a continuous but ineffectual fire from the ridge, none of
their jingal bullets falling anywhere near us. The Gurkhas had a very
difficult climb. The hill was quite 2,000 feet above the valley; the
lower and a good deal of the other slopes were of coarse sand mixed with
shale, and the rest nothing but slippery rock. The summit of the hill
was approached by a number of step-like shale terraces covered with
snow. When only a short way up, a snowstorm came on and obscured the
Gurkhas from view. The cold was intense, and the troops in the valley
began to collect the sparse brushwood, and made fires to keep themselves
warm.

On account of the nature of the hillside and the high altitude, the
progress of the Gurkhas was very slow, and it took them nearly three
hours to reach the ridge held by the enemy. When about two-thirds of the
way up, they came under fire from the ridge, but all the shots went
high. The jingals carried well over them at about 1,200 yards. The enemy
also sent a detachment to meet them on the top, but these did not fire
long, and retired as the Gurkhas advanced. When the 8th reached the
summit, the Tibetans were in full flight down the opposite slope, which
was also snow-covered. Thirty were shot down in the rout, and fifty-four
who were hiding in the caves were made prisoners.

In the meanwhile the battery had been making very good practice at 3,000
yards. Seven men were found dead on the summit, and four wounded,
evidently by their fire.

But to return to the main action in the gorge. The Tibetans held a very
strong position among some loose boulders on the right, two miles beyond
the gully which the Gurkhas had ascended to make their flank attack. The
rocks extended from the bluff cliff to the path which skirted the
stream. No one could ask for better cover; it was most difficult to
distinguish the drab-coated Tibetans who lay concealed there. To attack
this strong position General Macdonald sent Captain Bethune with one
company of the 32nd Pioneers, placing Lieutenant Cook with his Maxim on
a mound at 500 yards to cover Bethune's advance. Bethune led a frontal
attack. The Tibetans fired wildly until the Sikhs were within eighty
yards, and then fled up the valley. Not a single man of the 32nd was hit
during the attack, though one sepoy was wounded in the pursuit by a
bullet in the hand from a man who lay concealed behind a rock within a
few yards of him. While the 32nd were dislodging the Tibetans from the
path and the rocks above it, the mounted infantry galloped through them
to reconnoitre ahead and cut off the fugitives in the valley. They also
came through the enemy's fire at very close quarters without a casualty.
On emerging from the gorge the mounted infantry discovered that the
ridge the Tibetans had held was shaped like the letter S, so that by
doubling back along an almost parallel valley they were able to
intercept the enemy whom the Gurkhas had driven down the cliffs. The
unfortunate Tibetans were now hemmed in between two fires, and hardly a
man of them escaped.

The Tibetan casualties, as returned at the time, were much exaggerated.
The killed amounted to 100, and, on the principle that the proportion of
wounded must be at least two to one, it was estimated that their losses
were 300. But, as a matter of fact, the wounded could not have numbered
more than two dozen.

The prisoners taken by the Gurkhas on the top of the ridge turned out to
be impressed peasants, who had been compelled to fight us by the Lamas.
They were not soldiers by inclination or instinct, and I believe their
greatest fear was that they might be released and driven on to fight us
again.

The action at the Red Idol Gorge may be regarded as the end of the first
phase of the Tibetan opposition. We reached Gyantse on April 11, and the
fort was surrendered without resistance. Nothing had occurred on the
march up to disturb our estimate of the enemy. Since the campaign of
1888 no one had given the Tibetans any credit for martial instincts, and
until the Karo la action and the attack on Gyantse they certainly
displayed none. It would be hard to exaggerate the strategical
difficulties of the country through which we had to pass. The progress
of the mission and its escort under similar conditions would have been
impossible on the North-West frontier or in any country inhabited by a
people with the rudiments of sense or spirit. The difficulties of
transport were so great that the escort had to be cut down to the finest
possible figure. There were barely enough men for pickets, and many of
the ordinary precautions of field manoeuvres were out of the question.
But the Tibetan failed to realize his opportunities. He avoided the
narrow forest-clad ravines of Sikkim and Chumbi, and made his first
stand on the open plateau at Guru. Fortunately for us, he never learnt
what transport means to a civilized army. A bag of barley-meal, some
weighty degchies, and a massive copper teapot slung over the saddle are
all he needs; evening may produce a sheep or a yak. His movements are
not hampered by supplies. If the importance of the transport question
had ever entered his head, he would have avoided the Tuna camp, with its
Maxims and mounted infantry, and made a dash upon the line of
communications. A band of hardy mountaineers in their own country might
very easily surprise and annihilate an ill-guarded convoy in a narrow
valley thickly forested and flanked by steep hills. To furtively cut an
artery in your enemy's arm and let out the blood is just as effective as
to knock him on the head from in front. But in this first phase of the
operations the Tibetans showed no strategy; they were badly led, badly
armed, and apparently devoid of all soldier-like qualities. Only on one
or two occasions they displayed a desperate and fatal courage, and this
new aspect of their character was the first indication that we might
have to revise the views we had formed sixteen years ago of an enemy who
has seemed to us since a unique exception to the rule that a hardy
mountain people are never deficient in courage and the instinct of
self-defence.

The most extraordinary aspect of the fighting up to our arrival at
Gyantse was that we had only one casualty from a gunshot wound--the Sikh
who was shot in the hand at the Dzama Tang affair by a Tibetan whose
jezail was almost touching him. Yet at the Hot Springs the Tibetans
fired off their matchlocks and rifles into the thick of us, and at Guru
an hour afterwards the Gurkhas walked right up to a house held by the
enemy, under heavy fire, and took it without a casualty. The mounted
infantry were exposed to a volley at Samando at 100 yards, and again in
the Red Idol Gorge they rode through the enemy's fire at an even
shorter range. In the same action the 32nd made a frontal attack on a
strong position which was held until they were within eighty yards, and
not a man was hit. No wonder we had a contempt for the Tibetan arms.
Their matchlocks, weapons of the rudest description, must have been as
dangerous to their own marksmen as to the enemy; their artillery fire,
to judge by our one experience of it at Dzama Tang, was harmless and
erratic; and their modern Lhasa-made rifles had not left a mark on our
men. The Tibetans' only chance seemed to be a rush at close quarters,
but they had not proved themselves competent swordsmen. My own
individual case was sufficient to show that they were bunglers. Besides
the twelve wounds I received at the Hot Springs, I found seven
sword-cuts on my poshteen, none of which were driven home. During the
whole campaign we had only one death from sword-wounds.

Arrived at Gyantse, we settled down with some sense of security. A
bazaar was held outside the camp. The people seemed friendly, and
brought in large quantities of supplies. Colonel Younghusband, in a
despatch to the Foreign Office, reported that with the surrender of
Gyantse Fort on April 12 resistance in that part of Tibet was ended. A
letter was received from the Amban stating that he would certainly reach
Gyantse within the next three weeks, and that competent and trustworthy
Tibetan representatives would accompany him. The Lhasa officials, it
was said, were in a state of panic, and had begged the Amban to visit
the British camp and effect a settlement.

On April 20 General Macdonald's staff, with the 10-pounder guns, three
companies of the 23rd Pioneers, and one and a half companies of the 8th
Gurkhas, returned to Chumbi to relieve the strain on the transport and
strengthen the line of communications. Gyantse Jong was evacuated, and
we occupied a position in a group of houses, as we thought, well out of
range of fire from the fort.

Everything was quiet until the end of April, when we heard that the
Tibetans were occupying a wall in some strength near the Karo la,
forty-two miles from Gyantse, on the road to Lhasa. Colonel Brander, of
the 32nd Pioneers, who was left in command at Gyantse, sent a small
party of mounted infantry and pioneers to reconnoitre the position. They
discovered 2,000 of the enemy behind a strong loopholed wall stretching
across the valley, a distance of nearly 600 yards. As the party explored
the ravine they had a narrow escape from a booby-trap, a formidable
device of Tibetan warfare, which was only employed against our troops on
this occasion. An artificial avalanche of rocks and stones is so
cunningly contrived that the removal of one stone sends the whole engine
of destruction thundering down the hillside. Luckily, the Tibetans did
not wait for our main body, but loosed the machine on an advance guard
of mounted infantry, who were in extended order and able to take shelter
behind rocks.

On the return of the reconnaissance Colonel Brander decided to attack,
as he considered the gathering threatened the safety of the mission. The
Karo Pass is an important strategical position, lying as it does at the
junction of the two roads to India, one of which leads to Kangma, the
other to Gyantse. A strong force holding the pass might at any moment
pour troops down the valley to Kangma, cut us off in the rear, and
destroy our line of communications. When Colonel Brander led his small
force to take the pass, it was not with the object of clearing the road
to Lhasa. The measure was purely defensive: the action was undertaken to
keep the road open for convoys and reinforcements, and to protect
isolated posts on the line. The force with the mission was still an
'escort,' and so far its operations had been confined to dispersing the
armed levies that blocked the road.

On May 3 Colonel Brander left Gyantse with his column of 400 rifles,
comprising three companies of the 32nd Pioneers, under Captains Bethune
and Cullen and Lieutenant Hodgson; one company of the 8th, under Major
Row and Lieutenant Coleridge, with two 7-pounder guns; the Maxim
detachment of the Norfolks, under Lieutenant Hadow; and forty-five of
the 1st Mounted Infantry, under Captain Ottley. On the first day the
column marched eighteen miles, and halted at Gobshi. On the second day
they reached Ralung, eleven miles further, and on the third marched up
the pass and encamped on an open spot about two miles from where the
Tibetans had built their wall. A reconnaissance that afternoon estimated
the enemy at 2,000, and they were holding the strongest position on the
road to Lhasa. They had built a wall the whole length of a narrow spur
and up the hill on the other side of the stream, and in addition held
detached sangars high up the steep hills, and well thrown forward. Their
flanks rested on very high and nearly precipitous rocks. It was only
possible to climb the ridge on our right from a mile behind, and on the
left from nearly three-quarters of a mile. Colonel Brander at first
considered the practicability of delaying the attack on the main wall
until the Gurkhas had completed their flanking movements, cleared the
Tibetans out of the sangars that enfiladed our advance in the valley,
and reached a position on the hills beyond the wall, whence they could
fire into the enemy's rear. But the cliffs were so sheer that the ascent
was deemed impracticable, and the next morning it was decided to make a
frontal attack without waiting for the Gurkhas to turn the flank. No one
for a moment thought it could be done.

The troops marched out of camp at ten o'clock. One company of the 32nd
Pioneers, under Captain Cullen, was detailed to attack on the right,
and a second company, under Captain Bethune, to follow the river-bed,
where they were under cover of the high bank until within 400 yards of
the wall, and then rush the centre of the position. The 1st Mounted
Infantry, under Captain Ottley, were to follow this company along the
valley. The guns, Maxims, and one company of the 32nd in reserve,
occupied a small plateau in the centre. Half a company of the 8th
Gurkhas were left behind to guard the camp. A second half-company, under
Major Row, were sent along the hillside on the left to attack the
enemy's extreme right sangar, but their progress over the shifting shale
slopes and jagged rocks was so slow that the front attack did not wait
for them.

The fire from the wall was very heavy, and the advance of Cullen's and
Bethune's companies was checked. Bethune sent half a company back, and
signalled to the mounted infantry to retire. Then, compelled by some
fatal impulse, he changed his mind, and with half a company left the
cover of the river-bed and rushed out into the open within forty yards
of the main wall, exposed to a withering fire from three sides. His
half-company held back, and Bethune fell shot through the head with only
four men by his side--a bugler, a store-office babu, and two devoted
Sikhs. What the clerk was doing there no one knows, but evidently the
soldier in the man had smouldered in suppression among the office files
and triumphed splendidly. It was a gallant reckless charge against
uncounted odds. Poor Bethune had learnt to despise the Tibetans' fire,
and his contempt was not unnatural. On the march to Gyantse the enemy
might have been firing blank cartridges for all the effect they had left
on our men. At Dzama Tang Bethune had made a frontal attack on a strong
position, and carried it without losing a man. Against a similar rabble
it might have been possible to rush the wall with his handful of Sikhs,
but these new Kham levies who held the Karo la were a very different
type of soldier.

The frontal attack was a terrible mistake, as was shown four hours
afterwards, when the enemy were driven from their position without
further loss to ourselves by a flanking movement on the right.

At twelve o'clock Major Row, after a laborious climb, reached a point on
a hillside level with the sangars, which were strongly held on a narrow
ledge 200 yards in front of him. Here he sent up a section of his men
under cover of projecting rocks to get above the sangars and fire down
into them. In the meanwhile some of the enemy scrambled on to the rocks
above, and began throwing down boulders at the Gurkhas, but these either
broke up or fell harmless on the shale slopes above. After waiting an
hour, Major Row went back himself and found his section checked half-way
by the stone-throwing and shots from above; they had tried another way,
but found it impracticable.

Keeping a few men back to fire on any stone-throwers who showed
themselves, Row dribbled his men across the difficult place, and in half
an hour reached the rocky ledge above the sangars and looked right down
on the enemy. At the first few shots from the Gurkhas they began to
bolt, and, coming into the fire of the men below, who now rushed
forward, nearly every man--forty in all--was killed. One or two who
escaped the fire found their flight cut off by a precipice, and in an
abandonment of terror hurled themselves down on the rocks below. After
clearing the sangar, the Gurkhas had only to surmount the natural
difficulties of the rocky and steep hill; for though the enemy fired on
them from the wall, their shooting was most erratic. When at last they
reached a small spur that overlooked the Tibetan main position, they
found, to their disgust, that each man was protected from their fire by
a high stone traverse, on the right-hand of which he lay secure, and
fired through loopholes barely a foot from the ground.

The Gurkhas had accomplished a most difficult mountaineering feat under
a heavy fire; they had turned the enemy out of their sangars, and after
four hours' climbing they had scaled the heights everyone thought
inaccessible. But their further progress was barred by a sheer cliff;
they had reached a cul-de-sac. Looking up from the valley, it appeared
that the spot where they stood commanded the enemy's position, but we
had not reckoned on the traverses. This amazing advance in the enemy's
defensive tactics had rendered their position unassailable from the
left, and made the Gurkhas' flanking movement a splendid failure.

It was now two o'clock, and, except for the capture of the enemy's right
sangars, we had done nothing to weaken their opposition. The frontal and
flanking attacks had failed. Bethune was killed, and seventeen men. Our
guns had made no impression on their wall. Looking down from the spur
which overlooked the Tibetan camp and the valley beyond, the Gurkhas
could see a large reinforcement of at least 500 men coming up to join
the enemy. The situation was critical. In four hours we had done
nothing, and we knew that if we could not take the place by dusk we
would have to abandon the attack or attempt to rush the camp at night.
That would have been a desperate undertaking--400 men against 3,000, a
rush at close quarters with the bayonet, in which the superiority of our
modern rifles would be greatly discounted.

Matters were at this crisis, when we saw the Tibetans running out of
their extreme left sangars. At twelve o'clock, when the front attack had
failed and the left attack was apparently making no progress, fifteen
men of the 32nd who were held in reserve were sent up the hill on the
right. They had reached a point above the enemy's left forward sangar,
and were firing into it with great effect. Twice the Tibetans rushed
out, and, coming under a heavy Maxim fire, bolted back again. The third
time they fled in a mass, and the Maxims mowed down about thirty. The
capture of the sangars was a signal for a general stampede. From the
position they had won the Sikhs could enfilade the main wall itself. The
Tibetans only waited a few shots; then they turned and fled in three
huge bodies down the valley. Thus the fifteen Sikhs on the right saved
the situation. The tension had been great. In no other action during the
campaign, if we except Palla, did the success of our arms stand so long
in doubt. Had we failed to take the wall by daylight, Colonel Brander's
column would have been in a most precarious position. We could not
afford to retire, and a night attack could only have been pushed home
with heavy loss.

Directly the flight began, the 1st Mounted Infantry--forty-two men,
under Captain Ottley--rode up to the wall. They were ten minutes making
a breach. Then they poured into the valley and harassed the flying
masses, riding on their flanks and pursuing them for ten miles to within
sight of the Yamdok Tso. It showed extraordinary courage on the part of
this little band of Masbis and Gurkhas that they did not hesitate to
hurl themselves on the flanks of this enormous body of men, like
terriers on the heels of a flock of cattle, though they had had
experience of their stubborn resistance the whole day long, and rode
through the bodies of their fallen comrades. Not a man drew rein. The
Tibetans were caught in a trap. The hills that sloped down to the valley
afforded them little cover. Their fate was only a question of time and
ammunition. The mounted infantry returned at night with only three
casualties, having killed over 300 men.

The sortie to the Karo la was one of the most brilliant episodes of the
campaign. We risked more then than on any other occasion. But the safety
of the mission and many isolated posts on the line was imperilled by
this large force at the cross-roads, which might have increased until it
had doubled or trebled if we had not gone out to disperse it. A weak
commander might have faltered and weighed the odds, but Colonel Brander
saw that it was a moment to strike, and struck home. His action was
criticised at the time as too adventurous. But the sortie is one of the
many instances that our interests are best cared for by men who are
beyond the telegraph-poles, and can act on their own initiative without
reference to Government offices in Simla.

As the column advanced to the Karo la, a message was received that the
mission camp at Gyantse had been attacked in the early morning of the
5th, and that Major Murray's men--150 odd rifles--had not only beaten
the enemy off, but had made three sorties from different points and
killed 200.

With the action at the Karo la and the attack on the mission at Gyantse
began the second phase of the operations, during which we were
practically besieged in our own camp, and for nine weeks compelled to
act on the defensive. The courage of the Tibetans was now proved beyond
a doubt. The new levies from Kham and Shigatze were composed of very
different men from those we herded like sheep at Guru. They were also
better armed than our previous assailants, and many of them knew how to
shoot. At the same time they were better led. The primitive ideas of
strategy hitherto displayed by the Tibetans gave place to more advanced
tactics. The usual story got wind that the Tibetans were being led by
trained Russian Buriats. But there was no truth in it. The altered
conditions of the campaign, as we may call it, after it became necessary
to begin active operations, were due to the force of circumstances--the
arrival of stouter levies from the east, the great numerical superiority
of the enemy, and their strongly fortified positions.

The operations at Gyantse are fully dealt with in another chapter, and I
will conclude this account of the opposition to our advance with a
description of the attack on the Kangma post, the only attempt on the
part of the enemy to cut off our line of communications. Its complete
failure seems to have deterred the Tibetans from subsequent ventures of
the kind.

From Ralung, ten miles this side of the Karo la, two roads branch off to
India. The road leading to Kangma is the shortest route; the other road
makes a detour of thirty miles to include Gyantse. Ralung lies at the
apex of the triangle, as shown in this rough diagram. Gyantse and Kangma
form the two base angles.

[Illustration]

If it had been possible, a strong post would have been left at the Karo
la after the action of May 6. But our small force was barely sufficient
to garrison Gyantse, and we had to leave the alternative approach to
Kangma unguarded. An attack was expected there; the post was strongly
fortified, and garrisoned by two companies of the 23rd Pioneers, under
Captain Pearson.

The attack, which was made on June 7, was unexpectedly dramatic. We have
learnt that the Tibetan has courage, but in other respects he is still
an unknown quantity. In motive and action he is as mysterious and
unaccountable as his paradoxical associations would lead us to imagine.
In dealing with the Tibetans one must expect the unexpected. They will
try to achieve the impossible, and shut their eyes to the obvious. They
have a genius for doing the wrong thing at the wrong time. Their elan,
their dogged courage, their undoubted heroism, their occasional
acuteness, their more general imbecile folly and vacillation and
inability to grasp a situation, make it impossible to say what they will
do in any given circumstances. A few dozen men will hurl themselves
against hopeless odds, and die to a man fighting desperately; a handful
of impressed peasants will devote themselves to death in the defence of
a village, like the old Roman patriots. At other times they will forsake
a strongly sangared position at the first shot, and thousands will prowl
round a camp at night, shouting grotesquely, but too timid to make a
determined attack on a vastly outnumbered enemy.

The uncertainty of the enemy may be accounted for to some extent by the
fact that we are not often opposed by the same levies, which would imply
that theirs is greatly the courage of ignorance. Yet in the face of the
fighting at Palla, Naini, and Gyantse Jong, this is evidently no fair
estimate of the Tibetan spirit. The men who stood in the breach at
Gyantse in that hell of shrapnel and Maxim and rifle fire, and dropped
down stones on our Gurkhas as they climbed the wall, met death
knowingly, and were unterrified by the resources of modern science in
war, the magic, the demons, the unseen, unimagined messengers of death.

But the men who attacked the Kangma post, what parallel in history have
we for these? They came by night many miles over steep mountain cliffs
and rocky ravines, perhaps silently, with determined purpose, weighing
the odds; or, as I like to think, boastfully, with song and jest,
saying, 'We will steal in upon these English at dawn before they wake,
and slay them in their beds. Then we will hold the fort, and kill all
who come near.'

They came in the gray before dawn, and hid in a gully beside our camp.
At five the reveille sounded and the sentry left the bastions. Then they
sprang up and rushed, sword in hand, their rifles slung behind their
backs, to the wall. The whole attack was directed on the south-east
front, an unscalable wall of solid masonry, with bastions at each corner
four feet thick and ten feet high. They directed their attack on the
bastions, the only point on that side they could scramble over. They
knew nothing of the fort and its tracing. Perhaps they had expected to
find us encamped in tents on the open ground. But from the shallow
nullah where they lay concealed, not 200 yards distant, and watched our
sentry, they could survey the uncompromising front which they had set
themselves to attack with the naked sword. They had no artillery or
guncotton or materials for a siege, but they hoped to scale the wall and
annihilate the garrison that held it. They had come from Lhasa to take
Kangma, and they were not going to turn back. They came on undismayed,
like men flushed with victory. The sepoys said they must be drunk or
drugged. They rushed to the bottom of the wall, tore out stones, and
flung them up at our sepoys; they leapt up to seize the muzzles of our
rifles, and scrambled to gain a foothold and lift themselves on to the
parapet; they fell bullet-pierced, and some turned savagely on the wall
again. It was only a question of time, of minutes, and the cool
mechanical fire of the 23rd Pioneers would have dropped every man. One
hundred and six bodies were left under the wall, and sixty more were
killed in the pursuit. Never was there such a hopeless, helpless
struggle, such desperate and ineffectual gallantry.

Almost before it was light the yak corps with their small escort of
thirty rifles of the 2nd Gurkhas were starting on the road to Kalatso.
They had passed the hiding-place of the Tibetans without noticing the
500 men in rusty-coloured cloaks breathing quietly among the brown
stones. Then the Tibetans made their charge, just as the transport had
passed, and a party of them made for the yaks. Two Tibetan drivers in
our service stood directly in their path. 'Who are you?' cried one of
the enemy. 'Only yak-drivers,' was the frightened answer. 'Then, take
that,' the Tibetan said, slashing at his arm with no intent to kill. The
Gurkha escort took up a position behind a sangar and opened fire--all
save one man, who stood by his yak and refused to come under cover,
despite the shouts and warnings of his comrades. He killed several, but
fell himself, hacked to pieces with swords. The Tibetans were driven
off, and joined the rout from the fort. The whole affair lasted less
than ten minutes.

Our casualties were: the isolated Gurkha killed, two men in the fort
wounded by stones, and three of the 2nd Gurkhas severely wounded--two by
sword-cuts, one by a bullet in the neck.

But what was the flame that smouldered in these men and lighted them to
action? They might have been Paladins or Crusaders. But the Buddhists
are not fanatics. They do not stake eternity on a single existence. They
have no Mahdis or Juggernaut cars. The Tibetans, we are told, are not
patriots. Politicians say that they want us in their country, that they
are priest-ridden, and hate and fear their Lamas. What, then, drove them
on? It was certainly not fear. No people on earth have shown a greater
contempt for death. Their Lamas were with them until the final assault.
Twenty shaven polls were found hiding in the nullah down which the
Tibetans had crept in the dark, and were immediately despatched. What
promises and cajoleries and threats the holy men used no one will ever
know. But whatever the alternative, their simple followers preferred
death.

The second phase of the operations, in which we had to act on the
defensive in Gyantse, and the beginning of the third phase, which saw
the arrival of reinforcements and the collapse of the Tibetan
opposition, are described by an eye-witness in the next two chapters.
During the whole of these operations I was invalided in Darjeeling,
owing to a second operation which had to be performed on my amputation
wound.




CHAPTER IX

GYANTSE

[BY HENRY NEWMAN]


Gyantse Plain lies at the intersection of four great valleys running
almost at right angles to one another. In the north-eastern corner there
emerge two gigantic ridges of sandstone. On one is built the jong, and
on the other the monastery. The town fringes the base of the jong, and
creeps into the hollow between the two ridges. The plain, about six
miles by ten, is cultivated almost to the last inch, if we except a few
stony patches here and there. There are, I believe, thirty-three
villages in the plain. These are built in the midst of groves of poplar
and willow. At one time, no doubt, the waters from the four valleys
united to form a lake. Now they have found an outlet, and flow
peacefully down Shigatze way. High up on the cold mountains one sees the
cold bleached walls of the Seven Monasteries, some of them perched on
almost inaccessible cliffs, whence they look sternly down on the warmth
and prosperity below.

For centuries the Gyantse folk had lived self-contained and happy,
practising their simple arts of agriculture, and but dimly aware of any
world outside their own. Then one day there marched into their midst a
column of British troops--white-faced Englishmen, dark, lithe Gurkhas,
great, solemn, bearded Sikhs--and it was borne in upon the wondering
Gyantse men that beyond their frontiers there existed great nations--so
great, indeed, that they ventured to dispute on equal terms with the
awful personage who ruled from Lhasa. It is true that from time to time
there must have passed through Gyantse rumours of war on the distant
frontier. The armies that we defeated at Guru and in the Red Idol Gorge
had camped at Gyantse on their way to and fro. Gyantse saw and wondered
at the haste of Lhasa despatch-riders. But I question whether any
Gyantse man realized that events, great and shattering in his world,
were impending when the British column rounded the corner of Naini
Valley.

At first we were received without hostility, or even suspicion. The
ruined jong, uninhabited save for a few droning Lamas, was surrendered
as soon as we asked for it. A clump of buildings in a large grove near
the river was rented without demur--though at a price--to the
Commission. And when the country-people found that there was a sale for
their produce, they flocked to the camp to sell. The entry of the
British troops made no difference to the peace of Gyantse till the
Lamas of Lhasa embarked on the fatal policy of levying more troops in
Lhasa, Shigatze, and far-away Kham, and sending them down to fight. Then
there entered the peaceful valley all the horrors of war--dead and
maimed men in the streets and houses, burning villages, death and
destruction of all kinds. Gyantse Plain and the town became scenes of
desolation. To the British army in India war, unfortunately, is nothing
new, but one can imagine what an upheaval this business of which I am
about to write meant to people who for generations had lived in peace.

The incidents connected with the arrival of the mission with its escort
at Gyantse need not be described in detail. On the day of arrival we
camped in the midst of some fallow fields about two miles from the jong.
The same afternoon a Chinese official, who called himself 'General' Ma,
came into camp with the news that the jong was unoccupied, and that the
local Tibetans did not propose to offer any resistance. The next morning
we took quiet possession of the jong, placing two companies of Pioneers
in garrison. The General with a small escort visited the monastery
behind the fort, and was received with friendliness by the venerable
Abbot. Neither the villagers nor the towns-people showed any signs of
resentment at our presence. The Jongpen actively interested himself in
the question of procuring an official residence for Colonel Younghusband
and the members of the mission. There were reports of the Dalai Lama's
representatives coming in haste to treat. Altogether the outlook was so
promising that nobody was surprised when, after a stay of a week,
General Macdonald, bearing in mind the difficulty of procuring supplies
for the whole force, announced his intention of returning to Chumbi with
the larger portion of the escort, leaving a sufficient guard with the
mission.

The guard left behind consisted of four companies of the 32nd Pioneers,
under Colonel Brander; four companies of the 8th Gurkhas, under Major
Row; the 1st Mounted Infantry, under Captain Ottley; and the machine-gun
section of the Norfolks, under Lieutenant Hadow. Mention should also be
made of the two 7-pounder mountain-guns attached to the 8th Gurkhas,
under the command of Captain Luke.

Before the General left for Chumbi he decided to evacuate the jong. The
grounds on which this decision was come to were that the whole place was
in a ruinous and dangerous condition, the surroundings were insanitary,
there was only one building fit for human habitation, the water-supply
was bad and deficient, and there seemed to be no prospect of further
hostilities. Besides, from the military point of view there was some
risk in splitting up the small guard to be left behind between the jong
and the mission post. However, the precaution was taken of further
dismantling the jong. The gateways and such portions as seemed capable
of lending themselves to defence were blown up.

The house, or, rather, group of houses, rented by Colonel Younghusband
for the mission was situated about 100 yards from a well-made stone
bridge over the river. A beautiful grove, mostly of willow, extended
behind the post along the banks of the river to a distance of about 500
yards. The jong lay about 1,800 yards to the right front. There were two
houses in the intervening space, built amongst fields of iris and
barley. Small groups of trees were dotted here and there. Altogether,
the post was located in a spot as pleasant as one could hope to find in
Tibet.

For some days before the General left, all the troops were engaged in
putting the post in a state of defence. It was found that the force to
be left behind could be easily located within the perimeter of a wall
built round the group of houses. There was no room, however, for 200
mules and their drivers, needed for convoy purposes. These were placed
in a kind of hornwork thrown out to the right front.

After the departure of the General we resigned ourselves to what we
conceived would be a monotonous stay at Gyantse of two or three months,
pending the signing of the treaty. The people continued to be perfectly
friendly. A market was established outside the post, to which
practically the whole bazaar from Gyantse town was removed. We were able
to buy in the market, very cheap, the famous Gyantse carpets, for which
enormous prices are demanded at Darjeeling and elsewhere in India.
Unarmed officers wandered freely about Gyantse town, and the monks of
Palkhor Choide, the monastery behind the fort, willingly conducted
parties over the most sacred spots. They even readily sold some of the
images before the altars, and the silk screens which shrouded the forms
of the gigantic Buddhas. I mention these facts about the carpets and
images because, when hereafter they adorned Simla and Darjeeling
drawing-rooms, unkind people began to say that British officers had
wantonly looted Palkhor Choide, one of the most famous monasteries in
Tibet.

A little shooting was to be had, and officers wandered about the plain,
gun in hand, bringing home mountain-hare--a queer little beast with a
blue rump--duck, and pigeon. Occasionally an excursion up one of the
side valleys would result in the shooting of a burhel or of a Tibetan
gazelle. The country-people met with were all perfectly friendly.

Another feature of those first few peaceful days at Gyantse was the
eagerness with which the Tibetans availed themselves of the skilled
medical attendance with the mission. At first only one or two men
wounded at the Red Idol Gorge were brought in, but the skill of Captain
Walton, Indian Medical Service, soon began to be noised abroad, and
every morning the little outdoor dispensary was crowded with sufferers
of all kinds.

But during the last week in May reports began to reach Colonel
Younghusband that, so far from attempting to enter into negociations,
the Lhasa Government was levying an army in Kham, and that already five
or six hundred men were camped on the other side of the Karo la, and
were busily engaged in building a wall. Lieutenant Hodgson with a small
force was sent to reconnoitre. He came back with the news that the wall
was already built, stretching from one side of the valley to the other,
and that there were several thousand well-armed men behind it. Both
Colonel Younghusband and Colonel Brander considered it highly necessary
that this gathering should be immediately dispersed, for it is a
principle in Indian frontier warfare to strike quickly at any tribal
assembly, in order to prevent it growing into dangerous proportions. The
possibly exciting effect the force on the Karo la might have on the
inhabitants of Gyantse had particularly to be considered. Accordingly,
on May 3 Colonel Brander led the major portion of the Gyantse garrison
towards the Karo la, leaving behind as a guard to the post two companies
of Gurkhas, a company of the 32nd Pioneers, and a few mounted infantry,
all under the command of Major Murray.

I accompanied the Karo la column, and must rely on hearsay as to my
facts with regard to the attack on the mission. We heard about the
attack the night before Colonel Brander drove the Tibetans from their
wall on the Karo la, after a long fight which altered all our previous
conceptions of the fighting qualities of the Tibetans. The courage shown
by the enemy naturally excited apprehension about the safety of the
mission. Colonel Brander did not stay to rest his troops after their day
of arduous fighting, but began his return march next morning, arriving
at Gyantse on the 9th.

The column had been warned that it was likely to be fired on from the
jong if it entered camp by the direct Lhasa road. Accordingly, we
marched in by a circuitous route, moving in under cover of the grove
previously mentioned. The Maxims and guns came into action at the edge
of the grove to cover the baggage. But, though numbers of Tibetans were
seen on the walls of the jong, not a shot was fired.

We then learnt the story of the attack on the post. It appears that the
day after Colonel Brander left for the Karo la (May 3) certain wounded
and sick Tibetans that we had been attending informed the mission that
about 1,000 armed men had come down towards Gyantse from Shigatze, and
were building a wall about twelve miles away. It was added that they
might possibly attack the post if they got to know that the garrison had
been largely depleted. This news seemed to be worth inquiring into, and,
accordingly, next day Major Murray sent some mounted infantry to
reconnoitre up the Shigatze road. The latter returned with the
information that they had gone up the valley some seven or eight miles,
but had found no signs of any enemy.

The very next morning the post was attacked at dawn. It appears that the
Shigatze force, about 1,000 strong, was really engaged in building a
wall twelve miles away. Hearing that very few troops were guarding the
mission, its commander--who, I hear, was none other than Khomba Bombu,
the very man who arrested Sven Hedin's dash to Lhasa--determined to make
a sudden attack on the post. He marched his men during the night, and
about an hour before sunrise had them crouching behind trees and inside
ditches all round the post.

The attack was sudden and simultaneous. A Gurkha sentry had just time to
fire off his rifle before the Tibetans rushed to our walls and had their
muskets through our loopholes. The enemy did not for the moment attempt
to scale, but contented themselves with firing into the post through the
loopholes they had taken. This delay proved fatal to their plans, for it
gave the small garrison time to rise and arm. The brunt of the Tibetan
fire was directed on the courtyard of the house where the tents of the
members of the mission were pitched. Major Murray, who had rushed out of
bed half clad, first directed his attention to this spot. The Sikhs,
emerging from their tents with bandolier and rifle, in extraordinary
costumes, were directed towards the loopholes. Some were sent on the
roof of the mission-house, whence they could enfilade the attackers.
Elsewhere various junior officers had taken command. Captain Luke, who,
owing to sickness, had not gone on with the Karo la column, took charge
of the Gurkhas on the south and west fronts. Lieutenant Franklin, the
medical officer of the 8th Gurkhas, rallied Gurkhas and Pioneers to the
loopholes on the east and north. Lieutenant Lynch, the treasure-chest
officer, who had a guard of about twenty Gurkhas, took his men to the
main gate to the south. There were at this time in hospital about a
dozen Sikhs, who had been badly burnt in a lamentable gunpowder
explosion a few days previously. These men, bandaged and crippled as
they were, rose from their couches, made their painful way to the tops
of the houses, and fired into the enemy below. About a dozen Tibetans
had just begun to scramble over the wall by the time the defenders had
manned the whole position, which was now not only held by fighting men,
but by various members of the mission, including Colonel Younghusband,
who had emerged with revolvers and sporting guns. A few of the enemy got
inside the defences, and were immediately shot down.

Our fire was so heavy and so well directed that it is supposed that not
more than ten minutes elapsed from the time the first shot was fired to
the time the enemy began to withdraw. The withdrawal, however, was only
to the shelter of trees and ditches a few hundred yards away, whence a
long but almost harmless fusillade was kept up on the post. After about
twenty minutes of this firing, Major Murray determined on a rally.
Lieutenant Lynch with his treasure guard dashed out from the south gate.
Some five-and-twenty Tibetans were discovered hiding in a small refuse
hut about fifteen yards from the gate. The furious Gurkhas rushed in
upon them and killed them all, and then dashed on through the long
grove, clearing the enemy in front of them. Returning along the banks of
the river, the same party discovered another body of Tibetans hiding
under the arches of the bridge. Twenty or thirty were shot down, and
about fifteen made prisoners. Similar success attended a rally from the
north-east gate made by Major Murray and Lieutenant Franklin. The enemy
fled howling from their hiding-places towards the town and jong as soon
as they saw our men issue. They were pursued almost to the very walls of
the fort. Indeed, but for the fringe of houses and narrow streets at the
base of the jong, Major Murray would have gone on. The Tibetans,
however, turned as soon as they reached the shelter of walls, and it
would have been madness to attack five or six hundred determined men in
a maze of alleys and passages with only a weak company. Major Murray
accordingly made his way back to the post, picking up a dozen prisoners
_en route_.

In this affair our casualties only amounted to five wounded and two
killed. One hundred and forty dead of the enemy were counted outside
the camp.

During the course of the day Major Murray sent a flag of truce to the
jong with an intimation to the effect that the Tibetans could come out
and bury their dead without fear of molestation. The reply was that we
could bury the dead ourselves without fear of molestation. As it was
impossible to leave all the bodies in the vicinity of the camp, a heavy
and disagreeable task was thrown on the garrison.

Towards sundown the enemy in the jong began to fire into the camp, and
our troops became aware of the unpleasant fact that the Tibetans
possessed jingals, which could easily range from 1,800 to 2,000 yards.
It was also realized that the jong entirely dominated the post; that our
walls and stockades, protection enough against a direct assault from the
plain, were no protection against bullets dropped from a height. So for
the next four days, pending the return of the Karo la column, the little
garrison toiled unceasingly at improving the defences. Traverses were
built, the walls raised in height, the gates strengthened. It was
discovered that the Tibetan fire was heaviest when we attempted to
return it by sniping at figures seen on the jong. Accordingly, pending
the completion of the traverses and other new protective works, Major
Murray forbade any return fire.

Such was the position of affairs when the Karo la column returned. One
of Colonel Brander's first acts, after his weary troops had rested for
an hour or two, was to turn the Maxim on the groups who could be seen
wandering about the jong. They quickly disappeared under cover, but only
to man their jingals. Then began the bombardment of the post, which we
had to endure for nearly seven weeks.

This is the place to speak of the bombardment generally, for it would be
tedious to recapitulate in the form of a diary incidents which, however
exciting at the time, now seem remarkable only for their monotony. It
may be said at once that the bombardment was singularly ineffective.
From first to last only fifteen men in the post were hit. Of these
twelve were either killed or died of the wound. Of course, I exclude the
casualties in the fighting, of which I will presently speak, outside the
post. But the futility of the bombardment must not be entirely put down
to bad marksmanship on the part of the Tibetans. That our losses were
not heavier is largely due to the fact that the garrison laboured
daily--and at first at night also--in erecting protecting walls and
traverses. Practically every tent had a traverse built in front of it.
It was found that the hornwork in which the mules were located came
particularly under fire of the jong. This was pulled down one dark
night, and the mules transferred to a fresh enclosure at the back of the
post. Strong parapets of sand-bags were built on the roofs of the
houses. Every window facing the jong was securely blocked with mud
bricks. It will be realized how considerable was the labour involved in
building the traverses when it is remembered that the jong looked down
into the post. The majority of the walls had to be considerably higher
than the tents themselves. They were mostly built of stakes cut from the
grove, with two feet of earth rammed in between. After the first week or
so the enemy brought to bear on the post several brass cannon, throwing
balls weighing four or five pounds, and travelling with a velocity which
enabled them to penetrate our traverses--when they struck them, for the
majority of shots from the cannon whistled harmlessly over our heads.

Practically, we did not return the fire from the jong. All that was done
in this direction was to place one of Lieutenant Hadow's Maxims on the
roof of the house occupied by the mission, and thence to snipe during
the daylight hours at any warriors who showed themselves above the walls
of the jong. Hadow was very patient and persistent with his gun, and
quickly made it clear to the Tibetans that, if we were obliged to keep
under cover, so were they. But our fire from the post was probably as
ineffective as that of the enemy from the jong, for the Tibetans build
walls with extraordinary rapidity. Working mostly at night in order to
avoid the malignant Maxim, the enemy within a few days almost altered
the face of the jong. New walls, traverses, and covered ways seemed to
spring up with the rapidity of mushrooms.

Our life during the siege, if so the bombardment can be called, was
hardly as unpleasant as people might imagine. To begin with, we were
never short of food--that is to say, of Tibetan barley and meat. The
commissariat stock of tea--a necessity in Tibet--also never gave out.
From time to time also convoys and parcel-posts with little luxuries
came through. Again, the longest period for which we were without a
letter-post was eight days. Socially, the relations of the officers with
one another and with the members of the Commission were most harmonious.
I make a point of mentioning this fact, because all those who have had
any experience of sieges, or of similar conditions where small
communities are shut up together in circumstances of hardship and
danger, know how apt the temper is to get on edge, how often small
differences are likely to give rise to bitter animosities. But we had in
the Gyantse garrison men of such vast experience and geniality as
Colonel Brander, of such high culture and attainment as Colonel
Younghusband, Captain O'Connor, and Mr. Perceval Landon--the
correspondent of _The Times_; men whose spirits never failed, and who
found humour in everything, such as Major Row, Captain Luke, Captain
Coleridge, Lieutenant Franklin. Amongst the besieged was Colonel
Waddell, I.M.S., an Orientalist and Sinologist of European fame. Hence,
in some of its aspects the Gyantse siege was almost a delightful
episode. In the later days, when all the outpost fighting occurred, our
spirits were somewhat damped, for we had to mourn brave men killed and
sympathize with others dangerously wounded.

Of course, one of the first questions for consideration when the Karo la
column returned to Gyantse was whether the enemy could or could not be
turned out of the jong. To make a frontal attack on the frowning face
overlooking the post would have been foolhardy, but Colonel Brander
decided to make a reconnaissance to a monastery on the high hills to our
right, whence the jong itself could be overlooked. A subsidiary reason
for visiting this monastery was that it was known to have afforded
shelter to a number of those who had fled from the attack on the post.
The hill was climbed with every military precaution, but only a few old
monks were found in occupation of the buildings. More disappointing was
the fact that an examination through telescopes of the rear of the jong
showed that the Tibetans had been also building indefatigably there. A
strong loopholed wall ran zigzagging up the side of the rock. It was
clear that nothing could be done till the General returned from Chumbi
with more troops and guns.

For more than two weeks our rear remained absolutely open. The post,
carried by mounted infantry, came in and went out regularly. Two large
convoys reached us unopposed. The only danger lay in the fact that
people seen entering or leaving the post came under a heavy fire from
the jong. To minimize risks, departures from the post were always made
before dawn.

During the two weeks streams of men could be seen entering the jong from
both the Shigatze and Lhasa roads. Emboldened by numbers, and also by
our non-aggressive attitude, the enemy began to cast about for means of
taking the post. One of the first steps taken by the Tibetan General in
pursuance of this policy was to occupy during the night a small house
surrounded by trees, lying to our left front, almost midway between the
jong and the post. On the morning of the 18th bullets from a new
direction were whizzing in amongst us, and partly enfilading our
traverses. This was not to be tolerated, and the same night arrangements
were made for the capture of the position.

Five companies stole out during the hours of darkness and surrounded the
house. The rush, delivered at dawn, was left to the Gurkhas. But the
entrance was found blocked with stones, and the enemy was thoroughly
awake by the time the Gurkhas were under the wall. Luckily, the
loopholes were not so constructed as to allow the Tibetans to fire their
jingals down upon our men, who had only to bear the brunt of showers of
stones thrown upon them from the roof. The shower was well directed
enough to bruise a good many Gurkhas. Three officers were struck--
Major Murray, Lieutenant Lynch, and Lieutenant Franklin, I.M.S. Whilst
the Gurkhas were striving to effect an entrance, the Pioneer companies
deployed on the flanks came under a heavy fire from the jong. We had
three men hit. One fell on a bit of very exposed ground, and was
gallantly dragged under cover by Colonel Brander and Captain Minogue,
Staff officer.

It was soon evident that the Gurkhas would never get in without
explosives. Accordingly, Lieutenant Gurdon, 32nd Pioneers, was sent to
join them with a box of guncotton. Gurdon speedily blew a hole through
the wall, and the Gurkhas dashed in yelling. The Tibetans on the roof
could easily at this time have jumped off and escaped towards the jong.
But they chose a braver part. They slid down into the middle of the
courtyard, and, drawing their swords, awaited the Gurkha onset. I must
not describe the pitiful struggle that followed. The Tibetans--about
fifty in number--herded themselves together as if to meet a bayonet
charge, but our troops, rushing through the door, extended themselves
along the edges of the courtyard, and emptied their magazines into the
mob. Within a minute all the fifty were either dead or mortally wounded.

The house was hereafter held by a company of Gurkhas all through the
bombardment, and proved a great thorn in the side of the enemy; for the
Gurkhas often used to sally out at night and ambuscade parties of men
and convoys on the Shigatze road.




CHAPTER X

GYANTSE--_continued_

[BY HENRY NEWMAN]


On the afternoon of the day on which the house was taken we were
provided with a new excitement--continuous firing was heard to the rear
of the post about a mile away. Captain Ottley galloped out with his
mounted infantry, and was only just in time to save a party of his men
who were coming up from Kangma with the letter-bags. These Sikhs--eight
in number--were riding along the edge of the river, when they were met
by a fusillade from a number of the enemy concealed amongst sedges on
the opposite bank. Before the Sikhs could take cover, one man was
killed, three wounded, and seven out of the eight horses shot down. The
remaining men showed rare courage. They carried their wounded comrades
under cover of a ditch, untied and brought to the same place the
letter-bags, and then lay down and returned the fire of the enemy. The
Tibetans, however, were beginning to creep round, and the ammunition of
the Sikhs was running low, when Captain Ottley dashed up to the rescue.
Without waiting to consider how many of the enemy might be hiding in the
sedge, Ottley took his twenty men splashing through the river. Nearly
300 Tibetans bolted out in all directions like rabbits from a cover. The
mounted infantry, shooting and smiting, chased them to the very edge of
the plain. On reaching hilly ground the enemy, who must have lost about
fifty of their number, began to turn, having doubtless realized that
they were running before a handful of men. At the same time shots were
fired from villages, previously thought unoccupied, on Ottley's left,
and a body of matchlock men were seen running up to reinforce from a
large village on the Lhasa road. Under these conditions it would have
been madness to continue the fight, and Ottley cleverly and skilfully
withdrew without having lost a single man. In the meanwhile a company of
Pioneers had brought in the men wounded in the attack on the postal
riders.

This affair was even more significant than the occupation by the enemy
of the position taken by the Gurkhas in the early morning. It showed
that the Tibetan General had at last conceived a plan for cutting off
our line of communications. This was a rude shock. It implied that the
enemy had received reinforcements which were to be utilized for
offensive warfare of the kind most to be feared by an invader. We knew
that so long as our ammunition lasted there was absolutely no danger of
the post being captured. But an enemy on the lines would certainly
cause the greatest annoyance to, and might even cut off, our convoys. As
it would be very difficult to get messages through, apprehensions as to
our safety would be excited in the outer world. Further, General
Macdonald's arrangements for the relief of the mission would have to be
considerably modified if he were obliged to fight his way through to us.

With the same prompt decision that marked his action with regard to the
gathering on the Karo la, Colonel Brander determined on the very next
day to clear the villages found occupied by the mounted infantry. As far
as could be discovered, the villages were five in number, all on the
right bank of the river, and occupying a position which could be roughly
outlined as an equilateral triangle. Captain Ottley was sent round to
the rear of the villages to cut off the retreat of the enemy; Captain
Luke took his two mountain-guns, under cover of the right bank of the
river, to a position whence he could support the infantry attack, if
necessary, by shell fire. Two companies of Pioneers with one in reserve
were sent forward to the attack.

The first objective was two villages forming the base of the triangle of
which I have spoken. The troops advanced cautiously, widely extended,
but both villages were found deserted. They were set on fire. Then
Captain Hodgson with a company went forward to the village forming the
apex of the triangle. He came under a flanking fire from the villages
on the left, and had one man severely wounded. The houses in front
seemed to be unoccupied, and our right might have been swung round to
face this fire; but Colonel Brander was determined to do the work
thoroughly, and Hodgson was directed to move on and burn the village
ahead of him before changing front. The troops accordingly took no
notice of the flanking fire, and moved on till they were under the walls
of the two houses of which the village was composed.

Suddenly fire was opened on our soldiers from the upper windows of the
two houses. All the doors were found blocked with bricks and stones. Two
Sikhs dropped, and for the moment it seemed as if we would lose heavily.
But Lieutenant Gurdon with half a dozen men rushed up with a box of
explosives, and blew a breach in the wall. Two of the party helping to
lay the fuse were killed by shots fired from a loophole a few feet
above. Captain Hodgson was the first man through the breach. He was
confronted by a swordsman, who cut hard just as Hodgson fired his
revolver. The man fell dead, but Hodgson received a severe wound on the
wrist. But this was the only man who stood after the explosion. About
thirty others in the village rushed to the roofs of the houses, jumped
off, and fled to the left. They came, however, under a very heavy fire
as they were running away, and the majority dropped.

Preparations were now made for taking the remaining village. This was
protected by a high loopholed embankment, which sheltered about five or
six hundred of the enemy. The Pioneers had just extended, and were
advancing, when someone who happened to be looking at the jong through
his glasses suddenly uttered a loud exclamation. Turning round, we all
saw a dense stream of men, several thousands in number, forming up at
the base of the rock, evidently with the intention of rushing the
mission post whilst the majority of the garrison and the guns were
engaged elsewhere. Colonel Brander immediately gave the order for the
whole force to retire into the post at the double. The withdrawal was
effected before the Tibetans made their contemplated rush, but we all
felt that it was rather a narrow shave.

Troops were to have gone out again the next day to clear the village we
had left untaken, but the mounted infantry reconnoitring in the morning
reported that the enemy had fled, and that the lines of communication
were again clear.

On the succeeding day a large convoy and reinforcements under Major
Peterson, 32nd Pioneers, came safely through. The additional troops
included a section of No. 7 (British) Mountain Battery, under Captain
Easton; one and a half companies of Sappers and Miners, under Captain
Shepherd and Lieutenant Garstin; and another company of the 32nd
Pioneers. Major Peterson reported that his convoy had come under a
heavy fire from the village and monastery of Naini. This monastery lies
about seven miles from Gyantse in an opening of the valley just before
the road turns into Gyantse Plain. It holds about 5,000 monks. When the
column first passed by it, the monks were extremely friendly, bringing
out presents of butter and eggs, and readily selling flour and meat. The
monastery is surrounded by a wall thirty feet high, and at least ten
feet thick. The buildings inside are also solidly built of stone.
Altogether the position was a very difficult one to tackle, but Colonel
Brander, following his usual policy, decided that the enemy must be
turned out of it at all costs. Accordingly, on the 24th a column, which
included Captain Easton's two guns, marched out to Naini. But the
monastery and the group of buildings outside it were found absolutely
deserted. The walls were far too heavy and strong to be destroyed by a
small force, which had to return before nightfall, but Captain Shepherd
blew up the four towers at the corners and a portion of the hall in
which the Buddhas were enthroned.

The 27th provided a new excitement. About 1,000 yards to the right of
the post stood what was known as the Palla House, the residence of a
Tibetan nobleman of great wealth. The building consisted of a large
double-storied house, surrounded by a series of smaller buildings, each
within a courtyard of its own. During the night the Tibetans in the jong
built a covered way extending about half the distance between the jong
and Palla. In the morning the latter place was seen to be swarming with
men, busily occupied in erecting defences, making loopholes, and
generally engaged in work of a menacing character. The enemy could less
be tolerated in Palla than in the Gurkha outpost, for fire from the
former would have taken us absolutely in the flank, and the garrison was
not strong enough to provide the labour necessary for building an
entirely new series of traverses.

That very night Colonel Brander detailed the troops that were to take
Palla by assault at dawn. The storming-party was composed of three
companies of the 32nd under Major Peterson, assisted by the Sappers and
Miners with explosives under Captain Shepherd. Our four mountain-guns,
the 7-pounders under Captain Luke, and the 10-pounders under Captain
Easton, escorted by a company of Gurkhas, were detailed to occupy a
position on a ridge which overlooked Palla. The troops fell in at two in
the morning. The night was pitch-dark, but with such care were the
operations conducted that the troops had made a long detour, and got
into their respective positions before dawn, without an alarm being
raised.

Daylight was just breaking when Captain Shepherd crept up to the wall of
the house on the extreme left, where it was believed the majority of the
enemy were located, and laid his explosives. A tremendous explosion
followed, the whole side of the house falling in. A minute afterwards,
and Palla was alarmed and firing furiously all round, and even up in the
air. The jong also awoke, and from that time till the village was
finally ours poured a continuous storm of bullets into Palla, regardless
whether friend or foe was hit. Our guns on the ridge did their best to
quiet the jong, but without much effect. Against Tibetan walls, provided
as they are with head cover, our experience showed shrapnel to be almost
entirely useless.

A company of Pioneers followed Captain Shepherd into the breach he had
made. But they found themselves only in a small courtyard, with no means
of entering the rest of the village, except over or through high walls
lined by the enemy. All that could be done was to blow in another
breach. The preparations for doing this were attended with a good deal
of danger. Of three men who attempted to rush across the courtyard, two
were killed and the third mortally wounded. However, by creeping along
under cover of the wall, Captain Shepherd and Lieutenant Garstin were
able to lay the guncotton and light the fuse for another explosion. They
were fired at from a distance of a few yards, but escaped being hit by a
miracle. But the second explosion only led into another courtyard, from
which there was also no exit. There was the same fire to be faced from
the next house whilst the needful preparations were being made for
making a third breach.

During the time Shepherd with his gallant lieutenants and equally
gallant sepoys was working his way in from the left, the companies of
Pioneers lining ditches and banks outside Palla were exposed to a
persistent fire from about a hundred of the enemy inside the big
two-storied house mentioned above. The men in this house--all Kham
warriors--seemed to be filled with an extraordinary fury. Many exposed
themselves boldly at the windows, calling to our men to come on. A dozen
or so even climbed to the roof of the house, and danced about thereon in
what seemed frantic derision. There was a Maxim on the ridge with the
mountain-guns, the fire from which put an end to the fantastic display.
Our rifle fire, however, seemed totally unable to check the Tibetan
warriors in the loopholed windows. They kept up a fusillade which made a
rush impossible. Major Peterson finally, with great daring, led a few
men into the dwelling on the extreme right. The escalade was managed by
means of a ruined tree which projected from the wall. But Peterson, like
Shepherd, found himself in a courtyard with high walls which baffled
further progress.

The fight now began to drag. Hours passed without any signal incident.
The Tibetans were greatly elated at the failure of our troops to make
progress. They shouted and yelled, and were encouraged by answering
cheers from the jong. Then about mid-day the jong Commandant conceived
the idea of reinforcing Palla. A dozen men mounted on black mules,
followed by about fifty infantry, suddenly dashed out from the
half-completed covered way mentioned above, and made for the village.
This party was absolutely annihilated. As soon as it emerged from the
covered way it came under the fire, not only of the troops round the
village and on the hill, but of the Maxim on the roof of the
mission-house. In three minutes every single man and mule was down,
except one animal with a broken leg, gazing disconsolately at the body
of its master.

This disaster evidently shook the Tibetans in Palla. Their fire
slackened. Captain Luke on the ridge was then directed to put some
common shell into the roof of the double-storied house. He dropped the
shells exactly where they were wanted, and so disconcerted the enemy
that Shepherd was able to resume his preparations for making a way into
the Tibetan stronghold. But he still had to face an awkward fire, and
the three further breaches he made were attended by the loss of several
men, including Lieutenant Garstin, shot through the head. But the last
explosion led our troops into the big house. Tibetan resistance then
practically ceased. About twenty or thirty men made an attempt to get
away to the jong, but the majority were shot down before they could
reach the covered way.

In this affair our total casualties were twenty-three. In addition to
Lieutenant Garstin, we had seven men killed. The wounded included
Captain O'Connor, R.A., secretary to the mission, and Lieutenant
Mitchell, 32nd Pioneers. The enemy must have lost quite 250 in killed
and wounded. The position at Palla was too important to be abandoned,
and for the rest of the bombardment it was held by a company of Sikhs.
In order to provide free communication both day and night, Captain
Shepherd, with his usual energy, dug a covered way from the post to the
village.

The fight at Palla was the last affair of any importance in which the
garrison was engaged pending the arrival of the relieving force. The
Tibetans had received such a shock that in future they confined
themselves practically to the defensive, if we except five half-hearted
night attacks which were never anywhere near being pushed home. There
were no more attempts to interrupt our lines of communication, though
later on Naini was again occupied as part of the Tibetan scheme for
resisting General Macdonald's advance. The jong Commandant devoted his
energies chiefly to strengthening his already strong position.

The night attacks were all very similar in character, and may be summed
up and dismissed in a paragraph. Generally about midnight, bands of
Tibetans would issue from the jong and take up their position about four
or five hundred yards from the post. Then they would shout wildly, and
fire off their matchlocks and Martini rifles. The troops would
immediately rush to their loopholes, clad in impossible garments, and
wait shivering in the cold, finger on trigger, for the rush that never
came. After shouting and firing for about an hour, the Tibetans would
retire to the jong and our troops creep back to their beds. On no
occasion did the enemy come close enough to be seen in the dark. We
never fired a single shot from the post. Twice, however, the Gurkha
outpost and the Sikhs at Palla were enabled to get in a few volleys at
Tibetans as they slunk past. During the night attacks the jong remained
silent, except on one occasion, when there was so much firing from the
Gurkha outpost that the enemy thought we were about to make a
counter-attack. Every jingal, musket, and rifle in the jong was then
loosed off in any and every direction. We even heard firing in the rear
of the monastery. Although no one was hit in this wild fire, the volume
of it was ominously indicative of the strength in which the jong was
held.

But even more ominous against the day when our troops should be called
upon to take the jong were the defensive preparations mentioned above.
Nearly every morning we found that during the night the enemy had built
up a new wall or covered way somewhere on the jong or about the village
that fringed the base of the rock. When the fortress was fortified as
strongly as Tibetan wit could devise, the jong Commandant began to
fortify and place in a position of defence the villages and monasteries
on his right and left. It was calculated that, from the small monastery
perched on the hills to his left to Tsechen Monastery on a ridge to his
right, the Tibetan General had occupied and fortified a position with
nearly seven miles of front.

Whilst the Tibetans were engaged in making these preparations, our
garrison was busy collecting forage for the enormous number of animals
coming up with the relief column. Our rear being absolutely open, small
parties with mules were able to collect quantities of hay from villages
within a radius of seven miles behind us. It was the fire opened on
these parties when they attempted to push to the right or left of the
jong which first revealed to us the full extent of the defensive
position occupied by the enemy.

On June 6 Colonel Younghusband left the post with a returning convoy, in
order to confer with the General at Chumbi. This convoy was attacked
whilst halting at the entrenched post at Kangma. The enemy in this
instance came down from the Karo la, and it is for this reason that I do
not include the Kangma attack amongst the operations at and around
Gyantse.

It was not till June 15 that we got definite news of the approaching
advance of the relief column. Reinforcements had come up to Chumbi from
India in the interval, and the General was accompanied by the 2nd
Mounted Infantry under Captain Peterson, No. 7 British Mountain Battery
under Major Fuller, a section of No. 30 Native Mountain Battery under
Captain Marindin, four companies of the Royal Fusiliers under Colonel
Cooper, four companies of the 40th Pathans under Colonel Burn, five
companies of the 23rd Pioneers under Colonel Hogge, and the two
remaining companies of the 8th Gurkhas under Colonel Kerr, together with
the usual medical and other details.

The force arrived at Kangma on June 23. On the 25th a party of mounted
infantry from Gyantse met Captain Peterson's mounted infantry
reconnoitring at the monastery of Naini, previously mentioned. Whilst
greetings were being exchanged a sudden fire was opened on our men from
the monastery, which the enemy had apparently occupied and fortified
during the night. The position was apparently held in strength, and the
mounted infantry had no other course except to retire to their
respective camps. Captain Peterson had one man mortally wounded.

On the evening of the 26th the sentries at the mission post saw about
twenty mounted men, followed by two or three hundred infantry, issue
from the rear of the jong and creep up the hills on our left in the
direction of Naini. It was evident that a determined effort was to be
made at the monastery to check the advance of the relief column, which
was expected at Gyantse next day. Colonel Brander came to the conclusion
that he had found an opportunity for catching the Tibetans in a trap.
He determined to send out a force which would block the retreat of the
enemy when they retired before the advance of the relief column.
Accordingly, before dawn four companies of Pioneers, four guns, and the
Maxim gun left the post, and ascended the hills overlooking the
monastery. Captain Ottley's mounted infantry were directed to close the
road leading directly from Gyantse to the monastery.

Colonel Brander's forces were in position some hours before the mounted
infantry of the relief column appeared in sight. It was discovered that
the enemy not only held the monastery, but some ruined towers on the
hill above, and a cluster of one-storied dwellings in a grove below.
Captain Peterson with his mounted infantry appeared in front of the
monastery at eleven o'clock. He had with him a company of the 40th
Pathans, and his orders were to clear the monastery with this small
force, if the enemy made no signs of a stubborn resistance. Otherwise he
was to await the arrival of more troops with the mountain-guns.

Peterson delivered his attack from the left, having dismounted his
troopers, who, together with the 40th Pathans, were soon very hotly
engaged. The troops came under a heavy fire both from the monastery and
from a ruined tower above it, but advanced most gallantly. When under
the walls of the monastery, they were checked for some time by the
difficulty of finding a way in. In the meanwhile, hearing the heavy
firing, the General and his Staff, followed by Major Fuller's battery
and the rest of the 40th, had hastened up. The battery came into action
against the tower, and the 40th rushed up in support of their comrades.
Colonel Brander's guns and Maxim on the top of the hill were also
brought into play. For nearly an hour a furious cannonade and fusillade
raged. Then the Pathans and Peterson's troopers, circling round the
walls of the monastery, found a ramp up which they could climb. They
swarmed up, and were quickly inside the building. But the Tibetans had
realized that their retreat was cut off, and, instead of making a clean
bolt for it, only retired slowly from room to room and passage to
passage. Two companies of the 23rd were sent up to assist in clearing
the monastery. It proved a perfect warren of dark cells and rooms. The
Tibetan resistance lasted for over two hours. Bands of desperate
swordsmen were found in knots under trap-doors and behind sharp
turnings. They would not surrender, and had to be killed by rifle shots
fired at a distance of a few feet.

While the monastery was being cleared, another fight had developed in
the cluster of dwellings outside it to the right. From this spot Tibetan
riflemen were enfilading our troops held in reserve. The remaining
companies of the 23rd were sent to clear away the enemy. They took three
houses, but could not effect an entrance into the fourth, which was very
strongly barricaded. Lieutenant Turnbull, walking up to a window with a
section, had three men hit in a few seconds. One man fell directly under
the window. Turnbull carried him into safety in the most gallant
fashion. Then the General ordered up the guns, which fired into the
house at a range of a few hundred yards. But not till it was riddled
with great gaping holes made by common shell did the fire from the house
cease.

At about three o'clock the Tibetan resistance had completely died away,
and the column resumed its march towards Gyantse, which was not reached
till dark. But as the transport was making its slow way past Naini,
about half a dozen Tibetans who had remained in hiding in the monastery
and village opened fire on it. The Gurkha rearguard had a troublesome
task in clearing these men out, and lost one man killed.

In this affair at Naini our casualties were six killed and nine wounded,
including Major Lye, 23rd Pioneers, who received a severe sword-cut in
the hand.

The General's camp was pitched about a mile from the mission post, well
out of range of the jong, though our troops whilst crossing the river
came under fire from some of the bigger jingals. The next day was one of
rest, which the troops badly needed after their long march from Chumbi.
The Tibetans in the jong also refrained from firing. On the 29th the
General began the operations intended to culminate in the capture of the
jong. His objective was Tsechen Monastery, on the extreme left. But
before the monastery could be attacked, some twelve fortified villages
between it and the river had to be cleared. It proved a difficult task,
not so much on account of the resistance offered by the enemy--for after
a few idle shots the Tibetans quickly retired on the monastery--as
because of the nature of the ground that had to be traversed. The whole
country was a network of deep irrigation channels and water-cuts, in the
fording and crossing of which the troops got wet to the skin. However,
by four in the afternoon all the villages had been cleared, and the
Fusiliers were lying in a long grove under the right front of the
monastery.

It was then discovered that not only was Tsechen very strongly held, but
that masses of the enemy were lying behind the rocks on the top of the
ridge, on the summit of which there was a ruined tower, also held by
fifty or sixty men. The General sent two companies of Gurkhas to scale
the ridge from the left, whilst the 40th Pathans were ordered to make a
direct assault on the monastery. A hundred mounted infantry made their
way to the rear to cut off the retreat of the enemy. Fuller and Marindin
with their guns covered the advance of the infantry. Four Maxims were
also brought into action. Our guns made splendid practice on the top of
the ridge, and time and again we could see the enemy bolting from cover.
But with magnificent bravery they would return to oppose the advance of
the Gurkhas creeping round their flank. The guns had presently to cease
fire to enable the Gurkhas to get nearer. A series of desperate little
fights then took place on the top of the ridge, the Tibetans slinging
and throwing stones when they found they could not load their muskets
quickly enough. But as the Gurkhas would not be stopped, the Tibetans
had to move. In the meanwhile the Pathans worked through the monastery
below, only meeting with small resistance from a band of men in one
house. The Tibetans fled in a mass over the right edge of the ridge into
the jaws of the mounted infantry lying in wait below. Slaughter
followed.

It was now quite dark, and the troops made their way back to camp. Next
morning a party went up to Tsechen, found it entirely deserted, and set
fire to it. The taking of the monastery cost us the lives of Captain
Craster, 40th Pathans, and two sepoys. Our wounded numbered ten,
including Captains Bliss and Humphreys, 8th Gurkhas.

On July 1 the General intended assaulting the jong, but in the interval
the jong Commandant sent in a flag of truce. He prayed for an armistice
pending the arrival of three delegates who were posting down from Lhasa
with instructions to make peace. As Colonel Younghusband had been
directed to lose no opportunity of bringing affairs to an end at
Gyantse, the armistice was granted, and two days afterwards the
delegates, all Lamas, were received in open durbar in a large room in
the mission post. Colonel Younghusband, after having satisfied himself
that the delegates possessed proper credentials, made them a speech. He
reviewed the history of the mission, pointing out that we had only come
to Gyantse because of the obstinacy and evasion of the Tibetan
officials, who could easily have treated with us at Khamba Jong and
again at Tuna, had they cared to. We were perfectly willing to come to
terms here, and it rested with the peace delegates whether we went on to
Lhasa or not. Younghusband then informed the delegates that he was
prepared to open negociations on the next day. The delegates were due at
eleven next morning, but they did not put in an appearance till three.
They were then told that as a preliminary they must surrender the jong
by noon on the succeeding day. They demurred a great deal, but the
Commissioner was quite firm, and they went away downcast, with the
assurance that if the jong was not surrendered we should take it by
force. Younghusband, however, added that after the capture of the fort
he was perfectly willing to open negociations again.

Next day, shortly after noon, a signal gun was fired to indicate that
the armistice was at an end, and the General forthwith began his
preparations to storm the formidable hill fortress. The Tibetans had
taken advantage of the armistice to build more walls and sangars. No one
could look at the bristling jong without realizing how difficult was
the task before our troops, and without anxiety as to the outcome of the
assault in killed and wounded. But we all knew that the jong had to be
taken, whatever the cost.

Operations began in the afternoon, the General making a demonstration
against the left face of the jong and Palkhor Choide Monastery. Fuller's
battery took up a position about 1,600 yards from the jong. Five
companies of infantry were extended on either flank. Both the jong and
monastery opened fire on our troops, and we had one man mortally
wounded. The General's intention, however, was only to deceive the
Tibetans into thinking that we intended to assault from that side. As
soon as dusk fell, the troops were withdrawn and preparations made for
the real assault.

The south-eastern face of the rock on which the jong is built is most
precipitous, yet this was exactly the face which the General decided to
storm. His reasons, I imagine, were that the fringe of houses at the
base of the rock was thinnest on this side, and that the very
multiplicity of sangars and walls that the enemy had built prevented
their having the open field of fire necessary to stop a rush. Moreover,
down the middle of the rock ran a deep fissure or cleft, which was
commanded, the General noticed, by no tower or loopholed wall. At two
points, however, the Tibetans had built walls across the fissure. The
first of these the General believed could be breached by our artillery.
Our troops through that could work their way round to either flank, and
so into the heart of the jong.

The plan of operations was very simple. Before dawn three columns were
to rush the fringe of houses at the base. Then was to follow a storm of
artillery fire directed on all the salient points of the jong, after
which our guns were to make a breach in the lower wall across the cleft
up which the storming-party was later on to climb.

The action turned out exactly as was planned, with the exception that
the fighting lasted much longer than was expected, for the Tibetans made
a heroic resistance. The troops were astir shortly after midnight. The
night was very dark, and the necessary deployment of the three columns
took some hours. However, an hour before dawn the troops had begun their
cautious advance, the General and his Staff taking up their position at
Palla. The alarm was not given till our leading files were within twenty
yards of the fringe of houses at the base of the rock. The storm of fire
which then burst from the jong was an alarming indication of the
strength in which it was held. The heavy jingals were all directed on
Palla, and the General and his Staff had many narrow escapes. As on the
previous occasion when the jong bombarded us at night, there were
moments when every building in it seemed outlined in flame.

Of the three columns, only that on the extreme left, Gurkhas under
Major Murray, was able to get in at once. The other two columns were for
the time being checked, so bullet-swept was the open space they had to
cross. From time to time small parties of two or three dashed across in
the dark, and gained the shelter of the walls of the houses in front.
There were barely twenty men and half a dozen officers across when
Captain Shepherd blew in the walls of the house most strongly held. The
storming-party came under a most heavy fire from the jong above. Among
those hit was Lieutenant Gurdon, of the 32nd. He was shot through the
head, and died almost immediately. The breach made by Shepherd was the
point to which most of the men of the centre and right columns made, but
their progress became very slow when daylight appeared and the Tibetans
could see what they were firing at. It was not till nearly nine o'clock
that the whole fringe of houses at the base of the front face of the
rock was in our possession.

Then followed several hours of cannonading and small-arms fire. The
position the troops had now won was commanded almost absolutely from the
jong. It was found impossible to return the Tibetan fire from the roofs
of the houses we had occupied without exposing the troops in an
unnecessary degree, but loopholes were hastily made in the walls of the
rooms below, and the 40th Pathans were sent into a garden on the extreme
right, where some cover was to be had. Colonel Campbell, commanding the
first line, was able to show the enemy that our marksmen were still in a
position to pick off such Tibetans as were rash enough to unduly expose
themselves. In the meanwhile, Luke's guns on the extreme right, Fuller's
battery at Palla, and Marindin's guns at the Gurkha outpost threw a
stream of shrapnel on all parts of the jong.

But it was not till four o'clock in the afternoon that the General
decided that the time had come to make the breach aforementioned. The
reserve companies of Gurkhas and Fusiliers were sent across from Palla
in the face of very heavy jingal and rifle fire, and took cover in the
houses we had occupied. In the meanwhile Fuller was directed to make the
breach. So magnificent was the shooting made by his guns that a dozen
rounds of common shell, planted one below the other, had made a hole
large enough for active men to clamber through. The enemy quickly saw
the purport of the breach. Dozens of men could be distinctly seen
hurrying to the wall above it.

Then the Gurkhas and Fusiliers began their perilous ascent. The nimble
Gurkhas, led by Lieutenant Grant, soon outpaced the Fusiliers, and in
ten brief minutes forty or fifty of them were crouching under the
breach. The Tibetans, finding their fire could not stop us, tore great
stones from the walls and rolled them down the cleft. Dozens of men were
hit and bruised. Presently Grant was through the breach, followed by
fifteen or twenty flushed and shouting men. The breach won, the only
thought of the enemy was flight. They made their way by the back of the
jong into the monastery. By six o'clock every building in the great
fortress was in our possession.

Our casualties in this affair were forty-three--Lieutenant Gurdon and
seven men killed, and twelve officers, including the gallant Grant, and
twenty-three men wounded. These casualties exclude a number of men cut
and bruised with stones.

Next morning the monastery was found deserted. It was reported that the
bulk of the enemy had fled to Dongtse, about ten miles up the Shigatze
road. A column was sent thither, but found the place empty, except for a
very humble and submissive monk.

On the 14th, having waited for over a week in the hope of the peace
delegates putting in an appearance, the force started on its march to
Lhasa.




CHAPTER XI

GOSSIP ON THE ROAD TO THE FRONT


    ARI, SIKKIM,
      _June 24._

I write in an old forest rest-house on the borders of British Bhutan.

The place is quiet and pastoral; climbing roses overhang the roof and
invade the bedrooms; martins have built their nests in the eaves;
cuckoos are calling among the chestnuts down the hill. Outside is a
flower-garden, gay with geraniums and petunias and familiar English
plants that have overrun their straggling borders and scattered
themselves in the narrow plot of grass that fringes the forest. Some
Government officer must have planted them years ago, and left them to
fight it out with Nature and the caretaker.

The forest has encroached, and it is hard to say where Nature's hand or
Art's begins and ends. Beside a rose-bush there has sprung up the solid
pink club of the wild ginger, and from a bed of amaryllis a giant arum
raises itself four feet in its dappled, snake-like sheath. Gardens have
most charm in spots like this, where their mingled trimness and neglect
contrast with the insolent unconcern of an encroaching forest.

At Ari I am fifty miles from Darjeeling, on the road to Lhasa.

On June 21 I set my face to Lhasa for the second time. I took another
route to Chumbi, via Kalimpong and Pedong in British Bhutan. The road is
no further, but it compasses some arduous ascents. On the other hand it
avoids the low, malarious valleys of Sikkim, where the path is
constantly carried away by slips. There is less chance of a block, and
one is above the cholera zone. The Jelap route, which I strike
to-morrow, is closed, owing to cholera and land-slips, so that I shall
not touch the line of communications until within a few miles of Chumbi,
in which time my wound will have had a week longer to heal before I risk
a medical examination and the chance of being sent back. The relief
column is due at Gyantse in a few days; it depends on the length of the
operations there whether I catch the advance to Lhasa.

Through avoiding the Nathu-la route to Chumbi I had to arrange my own
transport. In Darjeeling my coolies bolted without putting a pack on
their backs. More were secured; these disappeared in the night at
Kalimpong without waiting to be paid. Pack-ponies were hired to replace
them, but these are now in a state of collapse. Arguing, and haggling,
and hectoring, and blarneying, and persuading are wearisome at all
times, but more especially in these close steamy valleys, where it is
too much trouble to lift an eyelid, and the air induces an almost
immoral state of lassitude, in which one is tempted to dole out silver
indifferently to anyone who has it in his power to oil the wheels of
life. I could fill a whole chapter with a jeremiad on transport, but it
is enough to indicate, to those who go about in vehicles, that there are
men on the road to Tibet now who would beggar themselves and their
families for generations for a macadamized highway and two hansom cabs
to carry them and their belongings smoothly to Lhasa. Before I reached
Kalimpong I wished I had never left the 'radius.' No one should embark
on Asiatic travel who is not thoroughly out of harmony with
civilization.

The servant question is another difficulty. No native bearer wishes to
join the field force. Why should he? He has to cook and pack and do the
work of three men; he has to make long, exhausting marches; he is
exposed to hunger, cold, and fatigue; he may be under fire every day;
and he knows that if he falls into the hands of the Tibetans, like the
unfortunate servants of Captain Parr at Gyantse, he will be brutally
murdered and cut up into mincemeat. In return for which he is fed and
clothed, and earns ten rupees more a month than he would in the security
of his own home. After several unsuccessful trials, I have found one
Jung Bir, a Nepali bearer, who is attached to me because I forget
sometimes to ask for my bazaar account, and do not object to his being
occasionally drunk. In Tibet the poor fellow will have little chance of
drinking.

My first man lost his nerve altogether, and, when told to work, could
only whine out that his father and mother were not with him. My next
applicant was an opium-eater, prematurely bent and aged, with the dazed
look of a toad that has been incarcerated for ages in a rock, and is at
last restored to light and the world by the blow of a mason's hammer. He
wanted money to buy more dreams, and for this he was willing to expose
his poor old body to hardships that would have killed him in a month.
Jung Bir was a Gurkha and more martial. His first care on being engaged
was to buy a long and heavy chopper--'for making mince,' he said; but I
knew it was for the Tibetans.

To reach Ari one has to descend twice, crossing the Teesta at 700 feet,
and the Russett Chu at 1,500 feet. These valleys are hotter than the
plains of India. The streams run east and west, and the cliffs on both
sides catch the heat of the early morning sun and hold it all day. The
closeness, the refraction from the rocks, and the evaporation of the
water, make the atmosphere almost suffocating, and one feels the heat
the more intensely by the change from the bracing air above. Crossing
the Teesta, one enters British Bhutan, a strip of land of less than 300
square miles on the left bank of the river. It was ceded to us with
other territories by the treaty of 1865; or, in plain words, it was
annexed by us as a punishment for the outrage on Sir Ashley Eden, the
British Envoy, who was captured and grossly insulted by the Bhutanese at
Punakha in the previous year. The Bhutanese were as arrogant, exclusive,
and impossible to deal with, in those days, as the Tibetans are to-day.
Yet they have been brought into line, and are now our friends. Why
should not the Tibetans, who are of the same stock, yield themselves to
enlightenment? Their evolution would be no stranger.

Nine miles above the Teesta bridge is Kalimpong, the capital of British
Bhutan, and virtually the foreign mart for what trade passes out of
Tibet. The Tomos of the Chumbi Valley, who have the monopoly of the
carrying, do not go further south than this. At Kalimpong I found a
horse-dealer with a good selection of 'Bhutia tats.' These excellent
little beasts are now well known to be as strong and plucky a breed of
mountain ponies as can be found anywhere. I discovered that their fame
is not merely modern when I came across what must be the first reference
to them in history in the narrative of Master Ralph Fitch, England's
pioneer to India. 'These northern merchants,' says Fitch, speaking of
the Bhutia, 'report that in their countrie they haue very good horses,
but they be litle.' The Bhutias themselves, equally ubiquitous in the
Sikkim Himalayas, but not equally indispensable, Fitch describes to the
letter. At Kalimpong I found them dirty, lazy, good-natured, independent
rascals, possessed, apparently, of wealth beyond their deserts, for hard
work is as alien to their character as straight dealing. Even the
drovers will pay a coolie good wages to cut grass for them rather than
walk a mile downhill to fetch it themselves.

The main street of Kalimpong is laid out in the correct boulevard style,
with young trees protected by tubs and iron railings. It is dominated by
the church of the Scotch Mission, whose steeple is a landmark for miles.
The place seems to be overrun with the healthiest-looking English
children I have seen anywhere, whose parents are given over to very
practical good works.

I took the Bhutan route chiefly to avoid running the gauntlet of the
medicals; but another inducement was the prospect of meeting Father
Desgodins, a French Roman Catholic, Vicar Apostolic of the Roman
Catholic Mission to Western Tibet, who, after fifty years' intimacy with
various Mongol types, is probably better acquainted with the Tibetans
than any other living European.

I met Father Desgodins at Pedong. The rest-house here looks over the
valley to his symmetrical French presbytery and chapel, perched on the
hillside amid waving maize-fields, whose spring verdure is the greenest
in the world. Scattered over the fields are thatched Lamas' houses and
low-storied gompas, with overhanging eaves and praying-flags--'horses
of the wind,' as the Tibetans picturesquely call them, imagining that
the prayers inscribed on them are carried to the good god, whoever he
may be, who watches their particular fold and fends off intruding
spirits as well as material invaders.

Behind the presbytery are terraced rice-fields, irrigated by perennial
streams, and bordered by thick artemisia scrub, which in the hot sun,
after rain, sends out an aromatic scent, never to be dissociated in
travellers' dreams and reveries from these great southern slopes of the
Himalayas.

Pere Desgodins is an erect old gentleman with quiet, steely gray eyes
and a tawny beard now turning gray. He is known to few Englishmen, but
his adventurous travels in Tibet and his devoted, strenuous life are
known throughout Europe.

He was sent out from France to the Tibet Mission shortly after the
murder of Krick and Bourry by the Mishmis. Failing to enter Tibet from
the south through Sikkim, he made preparations for an entry by Ladak.
His journey was arrested by the Indian Mutiny, when he was one of the
besieged at Agra. He afterwards penetrated Western Tibet as far as
Khanam, but was recalled to the Chinese side, where he spent twenty-two
perilous and adventurous years in the establishment of the mission at
Batang and Bonga. The mission was burnt down and the settlement expelled
by the Lamas. In 1888 Father Desgodins was sent to Pedong, his present
post, as Pro-vicar of the Mission to Western Tibet.

With regard to the present situation in Tibet, Father Desgodins
expressed astonishment at our policy of folded arms.

'You have missed the occasion,' he said; 'you should have made your
treaty with the Tibetans themselves in 1888. You could have forced them
to treat then, when they were unprepared for a military invasion. You
should have said to them'--here Pere Desgodins took out his watch--'"It
is now one o'clock. Sign that treaty by five, or we advance to-morrow."
What could they have done? Now you are too late. They have been
preparing for this for the last fifteen years.'

Father Desgodins was right. It is the old story of ill-advised
conciliation and forbearance. We were afraid of the bugbear of China.
The British Government says to her victim after the chastisement:
'You've had your lesson. Now run off and be good.' And the spoilt child
of arrested civilization runs off with his tongue in his cheek and
learns to make new arms and friends. The British Government in the
meantime sleeps in smug complacency, and Exeter Hall is appeased.

'But why did you not treat with the Tibetans themselves?' Pere Desgodins
asked. 'China!'--here he made an expressive gesture--'I have known China
for fifty years. She is not your friend.' Of course it is to the
interest of China to keep the tea monopoly, and to close the market to
British India. Travellers on the Chinese borders are given passports and
promises of assistance, but the natives of the districts they traverse
are ordered to turn them back and place every obstacle in their way.
Nobody knows this better than Father Desgodins. China's policy is the
same with nations as with individuals. She will always profess
willingness to help, but protest that her subjects are unmanageable and
out of hand. Why, then, deal with China at all? We can only answer that
she had more authority in Lhasa in 1888. Moreover, we were more afraid
of offending her susceptibilities. But that bubble has burst.

Others who hold different views from Pere Desgodins say that this very
unruliness of her vassal ought to make China welcome our intervention in
Tibet, if we engage to respect her claims there when we have subdued the
Lamas. This policy might certainly point a temporary way out of the
muddle, whereby we could save our face and be rid of the Tibet incubus
for perhaps a year. But the plan of leaving things to the suzerain Power
has been tried too often.

As I rode down the Pedong street from the presbytery someone called me
by name, and a little, smiling, gnome-like man stepped out of a
whitewashed office. It was Phuntshog, a Tibetan friend whom I had known
six years previously on the North-East frontier. I dismounted,
expecting entertainment.

The office was bare of furniture save a new writing-table and two
chairs, but heaped round the walls were piles of cast steel and iron
plates and files and pipes for bellows. Phuntshog explained that he was
frontier trade examiner, and that the steel had been purchased in
Calcutta by a Lama last year, and was confiscated on the frontier as
contraband. It was material for an armoury. The spoilt child was making
new arms, like the schoolboy who exercises his muscle to avenge himself
after a beating.

'Do you get much of this sort of thing?' I asked.

'Not now,' he said; 'they have given up trying to get it through this
way.'

A few years ago eight Mohammedans, experts in rifle manufacture, had
been decoyed from a Calcutta factory to Lhasa. Two had died there, and
one I traced at Yatung. His wife had not been allowed to pass the
barrier, but he was given a Tibetan helpmate. The wife lived some months
at Yatung, and used to receive large instalments from her husband; once,
I was told, as much as Rs. 1,400. But he never came back. The Tibetans
have learned to make rifles for themselves now. Phuntshog had a story
about another suspicious character, a mysterious Lama who arrived in
Darjeeling in 1901 from Calcutta with 5,000 alms bowls for Tibet, which
he said he had purchased in Germany. The man was detained in Darjeeling
five months under police espionage, and finally sent back to Calcutta.

Our Intelligence Department on this frontier is more alert than it used
to be. Dorjieff, Phuntshog told me, had been to Darjeeling twice, and
stayed in a trader's house at Kalimpong several days. He wore the dress
of a Lama. The ostensible object of his journey was to visit the sacred
Chorten at Khatmandu and the shrines of Benares. He visited these, and
was known to spend some time in Calcutta. On the occasion of the mission
to St. Petersburg Dorjieff and his colleagues entered India through
Nepal, took train to Bombay, and shipped thence to Odessa. The discovery
of the Lamas' visit to India was almost simultaneous with their
departure from Bombay.

Phuntshog is not an admirer of our Tibetan policy. We ought to have laid
ourselves out, he said, to influence the Lamas by secret agents, as
Russia did. There was no chance of a compromise now; they would fight to
the death. Phuntshog said much more which I suspected was inspired by
the daily newspapers, so I questioned him as to the feelings of the
natives of the district.

'The feeling of patriotism is extinct,' he said; and he looked at his
stomach, showing that he spoke the truth. 'We Tibetan British subjects
are fed well and paid well by your Government. We want nothing more. My
family are here. Now I have no trade to examine.' His eyes slowly
surveyed the room, glanced over his office table, with its pen and ink
and blank paper, lit on the 150 maunds of cast-steel, and finally rested
on two volumes by his elbow.

'Do you read much?' I asked.

'Sometimes,' he said. 'I have learnt a good deal from these books.'

They were the Holy Bible and Miss Braddon's 'Dead Men's Shoes.'

'Phuntshog,' I said, 'you are a psychological enigma. Your mind is like
that cast-iron huddled in the corner there, bought in an enlightened
Western city and destined for your benighted Lhasa, but stuck halfway.
Only it was going the other way. You don't understand? Neither do I.'

And here at Ari, as I look across the valley of the Russett Chu to
Pedong, and hear the vesper bell, I cannot help thinking of that strange
conflict of minds--the devotee who, seeing further than most men, has
cared nothing for the things of this incarnation, and Phuntshog, the
strange hybrid product of restless Western energies, stirring and
muddying the shallows of the Eastern mind. Or are they depths?

Who knows? I know nothing, only that these men are inscrutable, and one
cannot see into their hearts.




CHAPTER XII

TO THE GREAT RIVER


I reached Gyantse on July 12. The advance to Lhasa began on the 14th. As
might be expected from the tone of the delegates, peace negociations
fell through. The Lhasa Government seemed to be chaotic and conveniently
inaccessible. The Dalai Lama remained a great impersonality, and the
four Shapes or Councillors disclaimed all responsibility. The Tsong-du,
or National Assembly, who virtually governed the country, had sent us no
communication. The delegates' attitude of _non possumus_ was not
assumed. Though these men were the highest officials in Tibet, they
could not guarantee that any settlement they might make with us would be
faithfully observed. There seemed no hope of a solution to the deadlock
except by absolute militarism. If the Tibetans had fought so stubbornly
at Gyantse, what fanaticism might we not expect at Lhasa! Most of us
thought that we could only reach the capital through the most awful
carnage. We pictured the 40,000 monks of Lhasa hurling themselves
defiantly on our camp. We saw them mown down by Maxims, lanes of dead.
A hopeless struggle, and an ugly page in military history. Still, we
must go on; there was no help for it. The blood of these people was on
their own heads.

We left Gyantse on the 14th, and plunged into the unknown towards Lhasa,
which we had reason to believe lay in some hidden valley 150 miles to
the north, beyond the unexplored basin of the Tsangpo. Every position on
the road was held. The Karo la had been enormously strengthened, and was
occupied by 2,000 men. The enemy's cavalry, which we had never seen,
were at Nagartse Jong. Gubshi, a dilapidated fort, only nineteen miles
on the road, was held by several hundred. The Tibetans intended to
dispute the passage of the Brahmaputra, and there were other strong
positions where the path skirted the Kyi-chu for miles beneath
overhanging rocks, which were carefully prepared for booby-traps. We had
to launch ourselves into this intensely hostile region and compel some
people--we did not know whom--to attach their signatures and seals to a
certain parchment which was to bind them to good behaviour in the
future, and a recognition of obligations they had hitherto disavowed.

Our force consisted of eight companies of the 8th Gurkhas, five
companies of the 32nd Pioneers, four companies of the 40th Pathans, four
companies of the Royal Fusiliers, two companies of Mounted Infantry,
No. 30 British Mountain Battery, a section of No. 7 Native Mountain
Battery, 1st Madras Sappers and Miners, machine-gun section of the
Norfolks, and details.[14] The 23rd Pioneers, to their disgust, were
left to garrison Gyantse. The transport included mule, yak, donkey, and
coolie corps.

  [14] Companies of Pathans and Gurkhas were left to garrison Ralung,
      Nagartse, Pehte, Chaksam, and Toilung Bridge.

The first three marches to Ralung were a repetition of the country
between Kalatso and Gyantse--in the valley a strip of irrigated land,
green and gold, with alternate barley and mustard fields between
hillsides bare and verdureless save for tufts of larkspur, astragalus,
and scattered yellow poppies. To Gyantse one descends 2,000 feet from a
country entirely barren of trees to a valley of occasional willow and
poplar groves; while from Gyantse, as one ascends, the clusters of trees
become fewer, until one reaches the treeless zone again at Ralung
(15,000 feet). The last grove is at Gubchi.

I quote some notes of the march from my diary:

'_July 14._--The villages by the roadside are deserted save for old
women and barking dogs. The Tibetans came down from the Karo la and
impressed the villagers. Many have fled into the hills, and are hiding
among the rocks and caves. Our pickets fired on some to-night. Seeing
their heads bobbing up and down among the rocks, they thought they were
surrounded. Many of the fugitives were women. Luckily, none were hit.
They were brought into camp whimpering and salaaming, and became
embarrassingly grateful when it was made clear to them that they were
not to be tortured or killed, but set free. They were called back,
however, to give information about grain, and thought their last hour
had come.'

'_July 16._--All the houses between Gubchi and Ralung are decorated with
diagonal blue, red, and white stripes, characteristic of the Ning-ma
sect of Buddhists. They remind me of the walls of Damascus after the
visit of the German Emperor. Heavy rain falls every day. Last night we
camped in a wet mustard-field. It is impossible to keep our bedding
dry.'

From Ralung the valley widens out, and the country becomes more bleak.
We enter a plateau frequented by gazelle. Cultivation ceases. The ascent
to the Karo Pass is very gradual. The path takes a sudden turn to the
east through a narrow gorge.

On the 17th we camped under the Karo la in the snow range of Noijin Kang
Sang, at an elevation of 1,000 feet above Mont Blanc. The pass was free
of snow, but a magnificent glacier descended within 500 feet of the
camp. We lay within four miles of the enemy's position. Most of us
expected heavy fighting the next morning, as we knew the Tibetans had
been strengthening their defences at the Karo la for some days. Volleys
were fired on our scouts on the 16th and 17th. The old wall had been
extended east and west until it ended in vertical cliffs just beneath
the snow-line. A second barrier had been built further on, and sangars
constructed on every prominent point to meet flank attacks. The wall
itself was massively strong, and it was approached by a steep cliff, up
which it was impossible to make a sustained charge, as the rarefied air
at this elevation (16,600 feet) leaves one breathless after the
slightest exertion. The Karo la was the strongest position on the road
to Lhasa. If the Tibetans intended to make another stand, here was their
chance.

In the messes there was much discussion as to the seriousness of the
opposition we were likely to meet with. The flanking parties had a long
and difficult climb before them that would take them some hours, and the
general feeling was that we should be lucky if we got the transport
through by noon. But when one of us suggested that the Tibetans might
fail to come up to the scratch, and abandon the position without firing
a shot, we laughed at him; but his conjecture was very near the mark.

At 7 a.m. the troops forming the line of advance moved into position.
The disposition of the enemy's sangars made a turning movement extremely
difficult, but a frontal attack on the wall, if stubbornly resisted,
could not be carried without severe loss. General Macdonald sent
flanking parties of the 8th Gurkhas on both sides of the valley to scale
the heights and turn the Tibetan position, and despatched the Royal
Fusiliers along the centre of the valley to attack the wall when the
opposition had been weakened.

Stretched on a grassy knoll on the left, enjoying the sunshine and the
smell of the warm turf, we civilians watched the whole affair with our
glasses. It might have been a picnic on the Surrey downs if it were not
for the tap-tap of the Maxim, like a distant woodpecker, in the valley,
and the occasional report of the 10-pounders by our side, which made the
valleys and cliffs reverberate like thunder.

The Tibetans' ruse was to open fire from the wall directly our troops
came into view, and then evacuate the position. They thus delayed the
pursuit while we were waiting for the scaling-party to ascend the
heights.

At nine o'clock the Gurkhas on the left signalled that no enemy were to
be seen. At the same time Colonel Cooper, of the Royal Fusiliers,
heliographed that the wall was unoccupied and the Tibetans in full
retreat. The mounted infantry were at once called up for the pursuit.
Meanwhile one or two jingals and some Tibetan marksmen kept up an
intermittent fire on the right flanking party from clefts in the
overhanging cliffs. A battery replied with shrapnel, covering our
advance. These pickets on the left stayed behind and engaged our right
flanking party until eleven o'clock. To turn the position the Gurkhas
climbed a parallel ridge, and were for a long time under fire of their
jingals. The last part of the ascent was along the edge of a glacier,
and then on to the shoulder of the ridge by steps which the Gurkhas cut
in the ice with their _kukris_, helping one another up with the butts of
their rifles. They carried rope scaling-ladders, but these were for the
descent. At 11.30 Major Murray and his two companies of Gurkhas appeared
on the heights, and possession was taken of the pass. The ridge that the
Tibetans had held was apparently deserted, but every now and then a man
was seen crouching in a cave or behind a rock, and was shot down. One
Kham man shot a Gurkha who was looking into the cave where he was
hiding. He then ran out and held up his thumbs, expecting quarter. He
was rightly cut down with _kukris_. The dying Gurkha's comrades rushed
the cave, and drove six more over the precipice without using steel or
powder. They fell sheer 300 feet. Another Gurkha cut off a Tibetan's
head with his own sword. On several occasions they hesitated to soil
their _kukris_ when they could despatch their victims in any other way.

[Illustration: KARO LA]

On a further ridge, a heart-breaking ascent of shale and boulders, we
saw two or three hundred Tibetans ascending into the clouds. We had
marked them at the beginning of the action, before we knew that the wall
was unoccupied. Even then it was clear that the men were fugitives, and
had no thought of holding the place. We could see them hours afterwards,
with our glasses, crouching under the cliffs. We turned shrapnel and
Maxims on them; the hillsides began to move. Then a company of Pathans
was sent up, and despatched over forty. It was at this point I saw an
act of heroism which quite changed my estimate of these men. A group of
four were running up a cliff, under fire from the Pathans at a distance
of about 500 yards. One was hit, and his comrade stayed behind to carry
him. The two unimpeded Tibetans made their escape, but the rescuer could
only shamble along with difficulty. He and his wounded comrade were both
shot down.

The 18th was a disappointing day to our soldiers. But the action was of
great interest, owing to the altitude in which our flanking parties had
to operate. There is a saying on the Indian frontier: 'There is a hill;
send up a Gurkha.' These sturdy little men are splendid mountaineers,
and will climb up the face of a rock while the enemy are rolling down
stones on them as coolly as they will rush a wall under heavy fire on
the flat. Their arduous climb took three and a half hours, and was a
real mountaineering feat. The cave fighting, in which they had three
casualties, took place at 19,000 feet, and this is probably the highest
elevation at which an action has been fought in history.

A few of the Tibetans fled by the highroad, along which the mounted
infantry pursued, killing twenty and taking ten prisoners. I asked a
native officer how he decided whom to spare or kill, and he said he
killed the men who ran, and spared those who came towards him. The
destiny that preserved the lives of our ten Kham prisoners when nearly
the whole of the levy perished reminded me in its capriciousness of
Caliban's whim in Setebos:

    'Let twenty pass, and stone the twenty-first,
    Loving not, hating not, just choosing so.'

These Kham men were in our mounted infantry camp until the release of
the prisoners in Lhasa, and made themselves useful in many ways--loading
mules, carrying us over streams, fetching wood and water, and fodder for
our horses. They were fed and cared for, and probably never fared better
in their lives. When they had nothing to do, they would sit down in a
circle and discuss things resignedly--the English, no doubt, and their
ways, and their own distant country. Sometimes they would ask to go
home; their mothers and wives did not know if they were alive or dead.
But we had no guarantee that they would not fight us again. Now they
knew the disparity of their arms they might shrink from further
resistance, yet there was every chance that the Lamas would compel them
to fight. They became quite popular in the camp, these wild, long-haired
men, they were so good-humoured, gentle in manner, and ready to help.

I was sorry for these Tibetans. Their struggle was so hopeless. They
were brave and simple, and none of us bore the slightest vindictiveness
against them. Here was all the brutality of war, and none of the glory
and incentive. These men were of the same race as the people I had been
living amongst at Darjeeling--cheerful, jolly fellows--and I had seen
their crops ruined, their houses burnt and shelled, the dead lying about
the thresholds of what were their homes, and all for no fault of their
own--only because their leaders were politically impossible, which, of
course, the poor fellows did not know, and there was no one to tell
them. They thought our advance an act of unprovoked aggression, and they
were fighting for their homes.

Fortunately, however, this slaughter was beginning to put the fear of
God into them. We never saw a Tibetan within five miles who did not
carry a huge white flag. The second action at the Karo la was the end of
the Tibetan resistance. The fall of Gyantse Jong, which they thought
unassailable, seems to have broken their spirit altogether. At the Karo
la they had evidently no serious intention of holding the position, but
fought like men driven to the front against their will, with no
confidence or heart in the business at all. The friendly Bhutanese told
us that the Tibetans would not stand where they had once been defeated,
and that levies who had once faced us were not easily brought into the
field again. These were casual generalizations, no doubt, but they
contained a great deal of truth. The Kham men who opposed us at the
first Karo la action, the Shigatze men who attacked the mission in May,
and the force from Lhasa who hurled themselves on Kangma, were all new
levies. Many of our prisoners protested very strongly against being
released, fearing to be exposed again to our bullets and their own
Lamas.

On the 18th we reached Nagartse Jong, and found the Shapes awaiting us.
They met us in the same impracticable spirit. We were not to occupy the
jong, and they were not empowered to treat with us unless we returned to
Gyantse. It was a repetition of Khamba Jong and Tuna. In the afternoon a
durbar was held in Colonel Younghusband's tent, when the Tibetans showed
themselves appallingly futile and childish. They did not seem to realize
that we were in a position to dictate terms, and Colonel Younghusband
had to repeat that it was now too late for any compromise, and the
settlement must be completed at Lhasa.

From Nagartse we held interviews with these tedious delegates at almost
every camp. They exhausted everyone's patience except the
Commissioner's. For days they did not yield a point, and refused even
to discuss terms unless we returned to Gyantse. But their protests
became more urgent as we went on, their tone less minatory. It was not
until we were within fifty miles of Lhasa that the Tibetan Government
deigned to enter into communication with the mission. At Tamalung
Colonel Younghusband received the first communication from the National
Assembly; at Chaksam arrived the first missive the British Government
had ever received from the Dalai Lama. During the delay at the ferry the
councillors practically threw themselves on Colonel Younghusband's
mercy. They said that their lives would be forfeited if we proceeded,
and dwelt on the severe punishment they might incur if they failed to
conclude negociations satisfactorily. But Colonel Younghusband was equal
to every emergency. It would be impossible to find another man in the
British Empire with a personality so calculated to impress the Tibetans.
He sat through every durbar a monument of patience and inflexibility,
impassive as one of their own Buddhas. Priests and councillors found
that appeals to his mercy were hopeless. He, too, had orders from his
King to go to Lhasa; if he faltered, _his_ life also was at stake;
decapitation would await _him_ on his return. That was the impression he
purposely gave them. It curtailed palaver. How in the name of all their
Buddhas were they to stop such a man?

The whole progress of negociations put me in mind of the coercion of
very naughty children. The Lamas tried every guile to reduce his
demands. They would be cajoling him now if he had not given them an
ultimatum, and if they had not learnt by six weeks' contact and
intercourse with the man that shuffling was hopeless, that he never made
a promise that was not fulfilled, or a threat that was not executed. The
Tibetan treaty was the victory of a personality, the triumph of an
impression on the least impressionable people in the world. But I
anticipate.

While the Shapes were holding Colonel Younghusband in conference at
Nagartse, their cavalry were escorting a large convoy on the road to
Lhasa. Our mounted infantry came upon them six miles beyond Nagartse,
and as they were rounding them up the Tibetans foolishly fired on them.
We captured eighty riding and baggage ponies and mules and fourteen
prisoners, and killed several. They made no stand, though they were well
armed with a medley of modern rifles and well mounted. This was actually
the last shot fired on our side. The delegates had been full of
assurances that the country was clear of the enemy, hoping that the
convoy would get well away while they delayed us with fruitless protests
and reiterated demands to go back. While they were palavering in the
tent, they looked out and saw the Pathans go past with their rich yellow
silks and personal baggage looted in the brush with the cavalry. Their
consternation was amusing, and the situation had its element of humour.
A servant rushed to the door of the tent and delivered the whole tale of
woe. A mounted infantry officer arrived and explained that our scouts
had been fired on. After this, of course, there was no talk of anything
except the restitution of the loot. The Shapes deserved to lose their
kit. I do not remember what was arranged, but if any readers of this
record see a gorgeous yellow cloak of silk and brocade at a fancy-dress
ball in London, I advise them to ask its history.

This last encounter with the Tibetans is especially interesting, as they
were the best-armed body of men we had met. The weapons we captured
included a Winchester rifle, several Lhasa-made Martinis, a bolt rifle
of an old Austrian pattern, an English-made muzzle-loading rifle, a
12-bore breech-loading shot-gun, some Eley's ammunition, and an English
gun-case. The reports of Russian arms found in Tibet have been very much
exaggerated. During the whole campaign we did not come across more than
thirty Russian Government rifles, and these were weapons that must have
drifted into Tibet from Mongolia, just as rifles of British pattern
found their way over the Indian frontier into Lhasa. Also it must be
remembered that the weapons locally made in Lhasa were of British
pattern, and manufactured by experts decoyed from a British factory.
Had these men been Russian subjects, we should have regarded their
presence in Lhasa as an unquestionable proof of Muscovite assistance.
Jealousy and suspicion make nations wilfully blind. Russia fully
believes that we are giving underhand assistance to the Japanese, and
many Englishmen, who are unbiassed in other questions, are ready to
believe, without the slightest proof, that Russia has been supplying
Tibet with arms and generals. We had been informed that large quantities
of Russian rifles had been introduced into the country, and it was
rumoured that the Tibetans were reserving these for the defence of Lhasa
itself. But it is hardly credible that they should have sent levies
against us armed with their obsolete matchlocks when they were well
supplied with weapons of a modern pattern. Russian intrigue was active
in Lhasa, but it had not gone so far as open armament.

At Nagartse we came across the great Yamdok or Palti Lake, along the
shores of which winds the road to Lhasa. Nagartse Jong is a striking old
keep, built on a bluff promontory of hill stretching out towards the
blue waters of the lake. In the distance we saw the crag-perched
monastery of Samding, where lives the mysterious Dorje Phagmo, the
incarnation of the goddess Tara.

The wild mountain scenery of the Yamdok Tso, the most romantic in Tibet,
has naturally inspired many legends. When Samding was threatened by the
Dzungarian invaders early in the eighteenth century, Dorje Phagmo
miraculously converted herself and all her attendant monks and nuns into
pigs. Serung Dandub, the Dzungarian chief, finding the monastery
deserted, said that he would not loot a place guarded only by swine,
whereupon Dorje Phagmo again metamorphosed herself and her satellites.
The terrified invaders prostrated themselves in awe before the goddess,
and presented the monastery with the most priceless gifts. Similarly,
the Abbot of Pehte saved the fortress and town from another band of
invaders by giving the lake the appearance of green pasturelands, into
which the Dzungarians galloped and were engulfed. I quote these tales,
which have been mentioned in nearly every book on Tibet, as typical of
the country. Doubtless similar legends will be current in a few years
about the British to account for the sparing of Samding, Nagartse, and
Pehte Jong.

Special courtesy was shown the monks and nuns of Samding, in recognition
of the hospitality afforded Sarat Chandra Dass by the last incarnation
of Dorje Phagmo, who entertained the Bengali traveller, and saw that he
was attended to and cared for through a serious illness. A letter was
sent Dorje Phagmo, asking if she would receive three British officers,
including the antiquary of the expedition. But the present incarnation,
a girl of six or seven years, was invisible, and the convent was
reported to be bare of ornament and singularly disappointing. There
were no pigs.

If only one were without the incubus of an army, a month in the Noijin
Kang Sang country and the Yamdok Plain would be a delightful experience.
But when one is accompanying a column one loses more than half the
pleasure of travel. One has to get up at a fixed hour--generally
uncomfortably early--breakfast, and pack and load one's mules and see
them started in their allotted place in the line, ride in a crowd all
day, often at a snail's pace, and halt at a fixed place. Shooting is
forbidden on the line of march. When alone one can wander about with a
gun, pitch camp where one likes, make short or long marches as one
likes, shoot or fish or loiter for days in the same place. The spirit
which impels one to travel in wild places is an impulse, conscious or
unconscious, to be free of laws and restraints, to escape conventions
and social obligations, to temporarily throw one's self back into an
obsolete phase of existence, amidst surroundings which bear little mark
of the arbitrary meddling of man. It is not a high ideal, but men often
deceive themselves when they think they make expeditions in order to add
to science, and forsake the comforts of life, and endure hunger, cold,
fatigue and loneliness, to discover in exactly what parallel of unknown
country a river rises or bends to some particular point of the compass.
How many travellers are there who would spend the same time in an
office poring over maps or statistics for the sake of geography or any
other science? We like to have a convenient excuse, and make a virtue
out of a hobby or an instinct. But why not own up that one travels for
the glamour of the thing? In previous wanderings my experience had
always been to leave a base with several different objectives in view,
and to take the route that proved most alluring when met by a choice of
roads--some old deserted city or ruined shrine, some lake or marshland
haunted by wild-fowl that have never heard the crack of a gun, or a
strip of desert where one must calculate how to get across with just
sufficient supplies and no margin. I like to drift to the magnet of
great watersheds, lofty mountain passes, frontiers where one emerges
among people entirely different in habit and belief from folk the other
side, but equally convinced that they are the only enlightened people on
earth. Often in India I had dreamed of the great inland waters of Tibet
and Mongolia, the haunts of myriads of duck and geese--Yamdok Tso,
Tengri Nor, Issik Kul, names of romance to the wild-fowler, to be
breathed with reverence and awe. I envied the great flights of mallard
and pochard winging northward in March and April to the unknown; and
here at last I was camping by the Yamdok Tso itself--with an army.

Yet I have digressed to grumble at the only means by which a sight of
these hidden waters was possible. When we passed in July, there were no
wild-fowl on the lake except the bar-headed geese and Brahminy duck. The
ruddy sheldrake, or Brahminy, is found all over Tibet, and will be
associated with the memory of nearly every march and camping-ground. It
is distinctly a Buddhist bird. From it is derived the title of the
established Church of the Lamas, the Abbots of which wear robes of ruddy
sheldrake colour, Gelug-pa.[15] In Burmah the Brahminy is sacred to
Buddhism as a symbol of devotion and fidelity, and it was figured on
Asoka's pillars in the same emblematical character.[16] The Brahminy is
generally found in pairs, and when one is shot the other will often
hover round till it falls a victim to conjugal love. In India the bird
is considered inedible, but we were glad of it in Tibet, and discovered
no trace of fishy flavour.

  [15] Waddell, 'Lamaism in Tibet,' p. 200.

  [16] _Ibid._, p. 409.

Early in April, when we passed the Bam Tso and Kala Tso we found the
lakes frequented by nearly all the common migratory Indian duck; and
again, on our return large flights came in. But during the summer months
nothing remained except the geese and sheldrake and the goosander, which
is resident in Tibet and the Himalayas. I take it that no respectable
duck spends the summer south of the Tengri Nor. At Lhasa, mallard, teal,
gadwall, and white-eyed pochard were coming in from the north as we
were leaving in the latter half of September, and followed us down to
the plains. They make shorter flights than I imagined, and longer stays
at their fashionable Central Asian watering-places.

We marched three days along the banks of the Yamdok Tso, and halted a
day at Nagartse. Duck were not plentiful on the lake. Black-headed gulls
and redshanks were common. The fields of blue borage by the villages
were an exquisite sight. On the 22nd we reached Pehte. The jong, a
medieval fortress, stands out on the lake like Chillon, only it is more
crumbling and dilapidated. The courtyards are neglected and overgrown
with nettles. Soldiers, villagers, both men and women, had run away to
the hills with their flocks and valuables. Only an old man and two boys
were left in charge of the chapel and the fort. The hide fishing-boats
were sunk, or carried over to the other side. On July 24 we left the
lake near the village of Tamalung, and ascended the ridge on our left to
the Khamba Pass, 1,200 feet above the lake level. A sudden turn in the
path brought us to the saddle, and we looked down on the great river
that has been guarded from European eyes for nearly a century. In the
heart of Tibet we had found Arcadia--not a detached oasis, but a
continuous strip of verdure, where the Tsangpo cleaves the bleak hills
and desert tablelands from west to east.

All the valley was covered with green and yellow cornfields, with
scattered homesteads surrounded by clusters of trees, not dwarfish and
stunted in the struggle for existence, but stately and spreading--trees
that would grace the valley of the Thames or Severn.

We had come through the desert to Arcady. When we left Phari, months and
months before, and crossed the Tang la, we entered the desert.

Tuna is built on bare gravel, and in winter-time does not boast a blade
of grass. Within a mile there are stunted bushes, dry, withered, and
sapless, which lend a sustenance to the gazelle and wild asses, beasts
that from the beginning have chosen isolation, and, like the Tibetans,
who people the same waste, are content with spare diet so long as they
are left alone.

Every Tibetan of the tableland is a hermit by choice, or some strange
hereditary instinct has impelled him to accept Nature's most niggard
gifts as his birthright, so that he toils a lifetime to win by his own
labour and in scanty measure the necessaries which Nature deals lavishly
elsewhere, herding his yaks on the waste lands, tilling the unproductive
soil for his meagre crop of barley, and searching the hillsides for
yak-dung for fuel to warm his stone hut and cook his meal of flour.

Yet north and south of him, barely a week's journey, are warm, fertile
valleys, luxuriant crops, unstinted woodlands, where Mongols like
himself accept Nature's largess philosophically as the most natural
thing in the world.

It seems as if some special and economical law of Providence, such a law
as makes at least one man see beauty in every type of woman, even the
most unlovely, had ordained it, so that no corner of the earth, not even
the Sahara, Tadmor, Tuna, or Guru, should lack men who devote themselves
blindly and without question to live there, and care for what one might
think God Himself had forgotten and overlooked.

These men--Bedouin, Tibetans, and the like--enjoy one thing, for which
they forego most things that men crave for, and that is freedom. They do
not possess the gifts that cause strife, and divisions, and law-making,
and political parties, and changes of Government. They have too little
to share. Their country is invaded only at intervals of centuries. On
these occasions they fight bravely, as their one inheritance is at
stake. But they are bigoted and benighted; they have not kept time with
evolution, and so they are defeated. The conservatism, the
exclusiveness, that has kept them free so long has shut the door to
'progress,' which, if they were enlightened and introspective, they
would recognise as a pestilence that has infected one half of the world
at the expense of the other, making both unhappy and discontented.

The Tuna Plain is like the Palmyra Desert at the point where one comes
within view of the snows of Lebanon. It is not monotonous; there is too
much play of light and shade for that. Everywhere the sun shines, the
mirage dances; the white calcined plain becomes a flock of frightened
sheep hurrying down the wind; the stunted sedge by the lakeside leaps up
like a squadron in ambush and sweeps rapidly along without ever
approaching nearer. Sometimes a herd of wild asses is mingled in the
dance, grotesquely magnified; stones and nettles become walls and men.
All the country is elusive and unreal.

A few miles beyond Guru the road skirts the Bamtso Lake, which must once
have filled the whole valley. Now the waters have receded, as the
process of desiccation is going on which has entirely changed the
geographical features of Central Asia, and caused the disappearance of
great expanses of water like the Koko Nor, and the dwindling of lakes
and river from Khotan to Gobi. The Roof of the World is becoming less
and less inhabitable.

From the desert to Arcady is not a long journey, but armies travel
slowly. After months of waiting and delay we reached the promised land.
It was all suddenly unfolded to our view when we stood on the Khamba la.
Below us was a purely pastoral landscape. Beyond lay hills even more
barren and verdureless than those we had crossed. But every mile or so
green fan-shaped valleys, irrigated by clear streams, interrupted the
barrenness, opening out into the main valley east and west with perfect
symmetry. To the north-east flowed the Kyi Chu, the valley in which
Lhasa lay screened, only fifty-six miles distant.

To the south of the pass lay the great Yamdok Lake, wild and beautiful,
its channels twining into the dark interstices of the hills--valleys of
mystery and gloom, where no white man has ever trod. Lights and shadows
fell caressingly on the lake and hills. At one moment a peak was ebony
black, at another--as the heavy clouds passed from over it, and the
sun's rays illumined it through a thin mist--golden as a field of
buttercups. Often at sunset the grassy cones of the hills glow like
gilded pagodas, and the Tibetans, I am told, call these sunlit plots the
'golden ground.'

In bright sunlight the lake is a deep turquoise blue, but at evening
time transient lights and shades fleet over it with the moving clouds,
light forget-me-not, deep purple, the azure of a butterfly's wing--then
all is swept away, immersed in gloom, before the dark, menacing
storm-clouds.

On the 25th I crossed the river with the 1st Mounted Infantry and 40th
Pathans. My tent is pitched on the roof of a rambling two-storied house,
under the shade of a great walnut-tree. Crops, waist-deep, grow up to
the walls--barley, wheat, beans, and peas. On the roof are garden
flowers in pots, hollyhocks, and marigolds. The cornfields are bright
with English wild-flowers--dandelions, buttercups, astragalus, and a
purple Michaelmas daisy.

There is no village, but farmhouses are dotted about the valley, and
groves of trees--walnut and peach, and poplar and willow--enclosed
within stone walls. Wild birds that are almost tame are nesting in the
trees--black and white magpies, crested hoopoes, and turtle-doves. The
groves are irrigated like the fields, and carpeted with flowers.
Homelike butterflies frequent them, and honey-bees.

Everything is homelike. There is no mystery in the valley, except its
access, or, rather, its inaccessibility. We have come to it through snow
passes, over barren, rocky wildernesses; we have won it with toil and
suffering, through frost and rain and snow and blistering sun.

And now that we had found Arcady, I would have stayed there. Lhasa was
only four marches distant, but to me, in that mood of almost immoral
indolence, it seemed that this strip of verdure, with its happy pastoral
scenes, was the most impassable barrier that Nature had planted in our
path. Like the Tibetans, she menaced and threatened us at first, then
she turned to us with smiles and cajoleries, entreating us to stay, and
her seduction was harder to resist.

       *       *       *       *       *

To trace the course of the Tsangpo River from Tibet to its outlet into
Assam has been the goal of travellers for over a century. Here is one
of the few unknown tracts of the world, where no white man has ever
penetrated. Until quite recently there was a hot controversy among
geographers as to whether the Tsangpo was the main feeder of the
Brahmaputra or reappeared in Burmah as the Irawaddy. All attempts to
explore the river from India have proved fruitless, owing to the intense
hostility of the Abor and Passi Minyang tribes, who oppose all intrusion
with their poisoned arrows and stakes, sharp and formidable as spears,
cunningly set in the ground to entrap invaders; while the vigilance of
the Lamas has made it impossible for any European to get within 150
miles of the Tsangpo Valley from Tibet. It was not until 1882 that all
doubt as to the identity of the Tsangpo and Brahmaputra was set aside by
the survey of the native explorer A. K. And the course of the
Brahmaputra, or Dihong, as it is called in Northern Assam, was never
thoroughly investigated until the explorations of Mr. Needham, the
Political Officer at Sadiya, and his trained Gurkhas, who penetrated
northwards as far as Gina, a village half a day's journey beyond Passi
Ghat, and only about seventy miles south of the point reached by A. K.
from Tibet.

The return of the British expedition from Tibet was evidently the
opportunity of a century for the investigation of this unexplored
country. We had gained the hitherto inaccessible base, and were
provided with supplies and transport on the spot; we had no opposition
to expect from the Tibetans, who were naturally eager to help us out of
the country by whatever road we chose, and had promised to send
officials with us to their frontier at Gyala Sendong, who would forage
for us and try to impress the villagers into our service. The hostile
tribes beyond the frontier were not so likely to resist an expedition
moving south to their homes after a successful campaign as a force
entering their country from our Indian frontier. In the latter case they
would naturally be more suspicious of designs on their independence. The
distance from Lhasa to Assam was variously estimated from 500 to 700
miles. I think the calculations were influenced, perhaps unconsciously,
by sympathy with, or aversion from, the enterprise.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Shapes, it is true, though they promised to help us if we were
determined on it, advised us emphatically not to go by the Tsangpo
route. They said that the natives of their own outlying provinces were
bandits and cut-throats, practically independent of the Lhasa
Government, while the savages beyond the frontier were dangerous people
who obeyed no laws. The Shapes' notions as to the course of the river
were most vague. When questioned, they said there was a legend that it
disappeared into a hole in the earth. The country near its mouth was
inhabited by savages, who went about unclothed, and fed on monkeys and
reptiles. It was rumoured that they were horned like animals, and that
mothers did not know their own children. But this they could not vouch
for.

It was believed that tracks of a kind existed from village to village
all along the route, but these, of course, after a time would become
impracticable for pack transport. The mules would have to be abandoned,
and sent back to Gyantse by our guides, or presented to the Tibetan
officials who accompanied us. Then we were to proceed by forced marches
through the jungle, with coolie transport if obtainable; if not, each
man was to carry rice for a few days. The distance from the Tibet
frontier to Sadiya is not great, and the unexplored country is reckoned
not to be more than seven stages. The force would bivouac, and, if their
advance were resisted, would confine themselves solely to defensive
tactics. In case of opposition, the greatest difficulty would be the
care of the wounded, as each invalid would need four carriers. Thus, a
few casualties would reduce enormously the fighting strength of the
escort.

But opposition was unlikely. Mr. Needham, who has made the tribes of the
Dihong Valley the study of a lifetime, and succeeded to some extent in
gaining their confidence, considered the chances of resistance small. He
would, he said, send messages to the tribes that the force coming
through their country from the north were his friends, that they had
been engaged in a punitive expedition against the Lamas (whom the Abors
detested), that they were returning home by the shortest route to Assam,
and had no designs on the territory they traversed. It was proposed that
Mr. Needham should go up the river as far as possible and furnish the
party with supplies.

All arrangements had been made for the exploring-party, which was to
leave the main force at Chaksam Ferry, and was expected to arrive in
Sadiya almost simultaneously with the winding up of the expedition at
Siliguri. Captain Ryder, R.E., was to command the party, and his escort
was to be made up of the 8th Gurkhas, who had long experience of the
Assam frontier tribes, and were the best men who could be chosen for the
work. Officers were selected, supply and transport details arranged,
everything was in readiness, when at the last moment, only a day or two
before the party was to start, a message was received from Simla
refusing to sanction the expedition. Colonel Younghusband was entirely
in favour of it, but the military authorities had a clean slate; they
had come through so far without a single disaster, and it seemed that no
scientific or geographical considerations could have any weight with
them in their determination to take no risks. Of course there were
risks, and always must be in enterprises of the kind; but I think the
circumstances of the moment reduced them to a minimum, and that the
results to be obtained from the projected expedition should have
entirely outweighed them.

In European scientific circles much was expected of the Tibetan
expedition. But it has added very little to science. The surveys that
were made have done little more than modify the previous investigations
of native surveyors.[17]

  [17] The only expedition sanctioned is that which is now exploring
      the little-known trade route between Gyantse and Gartok, where a
      mart has been opened to us by the recent Tibetan treaty. The
      party consists of Captain Ryder, R.E., in command, Captain Wood,
      R.E., Lieutenant Bailey, of the 32nd Pioneers, and six picked men
      of the 8th Gurkhas. They follow the main feeder of the Tsangpo
      nearly 500 miles, then strike into the high lacustrine tableland
      of Western Tibet, passing the great Mansarowar Lake to Gartok;
      thence over the Indus watershed, and down the Sutlej Valley to
      Simla, where they are expected about the end of January. The
      party will be able to collect useful information about the trade
      resources of the country; but the route has already been mapped
      by Nain Singh, the Indian surveyor, and the geographical results
      of the expedition will be small compared with what would have
      been derived from the projected Tengri Nor and Brahmaputra trips.

An expedition to the mountains bordering the Tengri Nor, only nine days
north of Lhasa, would have linked all the unknown country north of the
Tsang po with the tracts explored by Sven Hedin, and left the map
without a hiatus in four degrees of longitude from Cape Comorin to the
Arctic Ocean. But military considerations were paramount.

For myself, the abandonment of the expedition was a great
disappointment. I had counted on it as early as February, and had made
all preparations to join it.




CHAPTER XIII

LHASA AND ITS VANISHED DEITY


The passage of the river was difficult and dangerous. If we had had to
depend on the four Berthon boats we took with us, the crossing might
have taken weeks. But the good fortune that attended the expedition
throughout did not fail us. At Chaksam we found the Tibetans had left
behind their two great ferry-boats, quaint old barges with horses' heads
at the prow, capacious enough to hold a hundred men. The Tibetan
ferrymen worked for us cheerfully. A number of hide boats were also
discovered. The transport mules were swum over, and the whole force was
across in less than a week.

But the river took its toll most tragically. The current is swift and
boisterous; the eddies and whirlpools are dangerously uncertain. Two
Berthon boats, bound together into a raft, capsized, and Major
Bretherton, chief supply and transport officer, and two Gurkhas were
drowned. It seemed as if the genius of the river, offended at our
intrusion, had claimed its price and carried off the most valuable life
in the force. It was Major Bretherton's foresight more than anything
that enabled us to reach Lhasa. His loss was calamitous.

We left our camp at the ferry on July 31, and started for Lhasa, which
was only forty-three miles distant. It was difficult to believe that in
three days we would be looking on the Potala.

The Kyi Chu, the holy river of Lhasa, flows into the Tsangpo at Chushul,
three miles below Chaksam ferry, where our troops crossed. The river is
almost as broad as the Thames at Greenwich, and the stream is swift and
clear. The valley is cultivated in places, but long stretches are bare
and rocky. Sand-dunes, overgrown with artemisia scrub, extend to the
margin of cultivation, leaving a well-defined line between the green
cornfields and the barren sand. The crops were ripening at the time of
our advance, and promised a plentiful harvest.

For many miles the road is cut out of a precipitous cliff above the
river. A few hundred men could have destroyed it in an afternoon, and
delayed our advance for another week. Newly-built sangars at the
entrance of the gorge showed that the Tibetans had intended to hold it.
But they left the valley in a disorganized state the day we reached the
Tsangpo. Had they fortified the position, they might have made it
stronger than the Karo la.

The heat of the valley was almost tropical. Summer by the Kyi Chu River
is very different from one's first conceptions of Tibet. To escape the
heat, I used to write my diary in the shade of gardens and willow
groves. Hoopoes, magpies, and huge black ravens became inquisitive and
confidential. I have a pile of little black notebooks I scribbled over
in their society, dirty and torn and soiled with pressed flowers. For a
picture of the valley I will go to these. One's freshest impressions are
the best, and truer than reminiscences.


    NETHANG.

In the most fertile part of the Kyi Chu Valley, where the fields are
intersected in all directions by clear-running streams bordered with
flowers, in a grove of poplars where doves were singing all day long, I
found Atisa's tomb.

It was built in a large, plain, barn-like building, clean and
sweet-smelling as a granary, and innocent of ornament outside and in. It
was the only clean and simple place devoted to religion I had seen in
Tibet.

In every house and monastery we entered on the road there were gilded
images, tawdry paintings, demons and she-devils, garish frescoes on the
wall, hideous grinning devil-masks, all the Lama's spurious apparatus of
terrorism.

These were the outward symbols of demonolatry and superstition invented
by scheming priests as the fabric of their sacerdotalism. But this was
the resting-place of the Reformer, the true son of Buddha, who came
over the Himalayas to preach a religion of love and mercy.

I entered the building out of the glare of the sun, expecting nothing
but the usual monsters and abortions--just as one is dragged into a
church in some tourist-ridden land, where, if only for the sake of
peace, one must cast an apathetic eye at the lions of the country. But
as the tomb gradually assumed shape in the dim light, I knew that there
was someone here, a priest or a community, who understood Atisa, who
knew what he would have wished his last resting-place to be; or perhaps
the good old monk had left a will or spoken a plain word that had been
handed down and remembered these thousand years, and was now, no doubt,
regarded as an eccentric's whim, that there must be no gods or demons by
his tomb, nothing abnormal, no pretentiousness of any kind. If his
teaching had lived, how simple and honest and different Tibet would be
to-day!

The tomb was not beautiful--a large square plinth, supporting layers of
gradually decreasing circumference and forming steps two feet in height,
the last a platform on which was based a substantial vat-like structure
with no ornament or inscription except a thin line of black pencilled
saints. By climbing up the layers of masonry I found a pair of slant
eyes gazing at nothing and hidden by a curve in the stone from gazers
below. This was the only painting on the tomb.

Never in the thousand years since the good monk was laid to rest at
Nethang had a white man entered this shrine. To-day the courtyard was
crowded with mules and drivers; Hindus and Pathans in British uniform:
they were ransacking the place for corn. A transport officer was
shouting:

'How many bags have you, babu?'

'A hundred and seven, sir.'

'Remember, if anyone loots, he will get fifty _beynt_' (stripes with the
cat-o'-nine-tails).

Then he turned to me.

'What the devil is that old thief doing over there?' he said, and nodded
at a man with archaeological interests, who was peering about in a dark
corner by the tomb. 'There is nothing more here.'

'He is examining Atisa's tomb.'

'And who the devil is Atisa?'

And who is he? Merely a name to a few dry-as-dust pedants. Everything
human he did is forgotten. The faintest ripple remains to-day from that
stone cast into the stagnant waters so many years ago. A few monks drone
away their days in a monastery close by. In the courtyard there is a
border of hollyhocks and snapdragon and asters. Here the unsavoury
guardians of Atisa's tomb watch me as I write, and wonder what on earth
I am doing among them, and what spell or mantra I am inscribing in the
little black book that shuts so tightly with a clasp.


    TOILUNG.

To-morrow we reach Lhasa.

A few hours ago we caught the first glimpse of the Potala Palace, a
golden dome standing out on a bluff rock in the centre of the valley.
The city is not seen from afar perched on a hill like the great
monasteries and jongs of the country. It is literally 'hidden.' A rocky
promontory projects from the bleak hills to the south like a screen,
hiding Lhasa, as if Nature conspired in its seclusion. Here at a
distance of seven miles we can see the Potala and the Lamas' Medical
College.

Trees and undulating ground shut out the view of the actual city until
one is within a mile of it.

To-morrow we camp outside. It is nearly a hundred years since Thomas
Manning, the only Englishman (until to-day) who ever saw Lhasa, preceded
us. Our journey has not been easy, but we have come in spite of
everything.

The Lamas have opposed us with all their material and spiritual
resources. They have fought us with medieval weapons and a medley of
modern firearms. They have held Commination Services, recited mantras,
and cursed us solemnly for days. Yet we have come on.

They have sent delegates and messengers of every rank to threaten and
entreat and plead with us--emissaries of increasing importance as we
have drawn nearer their capital, until the Dalai Lama despatched his own
Grand Chamberlain and Grand Secretary, and, greater than these, the Ta
Lama and Yutok Shape, members of the ruling Council of Five, whose
sacred persons had never before been seen by European eyes. To-morrow
the Amban himself comes to meet Colonel Younghusband. The Dalai Lama has
sent him a letter sealed with his own seal.

Every stretch of road from the frontier to Lhasa has had its symbol of
remonstrance. Cairns and chortens, and _mani_ walls and praying-flags,
demons painted on the rock, writings on the wall, white stones piled
upon black, have emitted their ray of protest and malevolence in vain.

The Lamas knew we must come. Hundreds of years ago a Buddhist saint
wrote it in his book of prophecies, Ma-ong Lung-Ten, which may be bought
to-day in the Lhasa book-shops. He predicted that Tibet would be invaded
and conquered by the Philings (Europeans), when all of the true religion
would go to Chang Shambula, the Northern Paradise, and Buddhism would
become extinct in the country.

And now the Lamas believe that the prophecy will be fulfilled by our
entry into Lhasa, and that their religion will decay before foreign
influence. The Dalai Lama, they say, will die, not by violence or
sickness, but by some spiritual visitation. His spirit will seek some
other incarnation, when he can no longer benefit his people or secure
his country, so long sacred to Buddhists, from the contamination of
foreign intrusion.

The Tibetans are not the savages they are depicted. They are civilized,
if medieval. The country is governed on the feudal system. The monks are
the overlords, the peasantry their serfs. The poor are not oppressed.
They and the small tenant farmers work ungrudgingly for their spiritual
masters, to whom they owe a blind devotion. They are not discontented,
though they give more than a tithe of their small income to the Church.
It must be remembered that every family contributes at least one member
to the priesthood, so that, when we are inclined to abuse the monks for
consuming the greater part of the country's produce, we should remember
that the laymen are not the victims of class prejudice, the plebeians
groaning under the burden of the patricians, so much as the servants of
a community chosen from among themselves, and with whom they are
connected by family ties.

No doubt the Lamas employ spiritual terrorism to maintain their
influence and preserve the temporal government in their hands; and when
they speak of their religion being injured by our intrusion, they are
thinking, no doubt, of another unveiling of mysteries, the dreaded age
of materialism and reason, when little by little their ignorant serfs
will be brought into contact with the facts of life, and begin to
question the justness of the relations that have existed between
themselves and their rulers for centuries. But at present the people
are medieval, not only in their system of government and their religion,
their inquisition, their witchcraft, their incantations, their ordeals
by fire and boiling oil, but in every aspect of their daily life.

I question if ever in the history of the world there has been another
occasion when bigotry and darkness have been exposed with such
abruptness to the inroad of science, when a barrier of ignorance created
by jealousy and fear as a screen between two peoples living side by side
has been demolished so suddenly to admit the light of an advanced
civilization.

The Tibetans, no doubt, will benefit, and many abuses will be swept
away. Yet there will always be people who will hanker after the medieval
and romantic, who will say: 'We men are children. Why could we not have
been content that there was one mystery not unveiled, one country of an
ancient arrested civilization, and an established Church where men are
still guided by sorcery and incantations, and direct their mundane
affairs with one eye on a grotesque spirit world, which is the most real
thing in their lives--a land of topsy-turvy and inverted proportions,
where men spend half their lives mumbling unintelligible mantras and
turning mechanical prayers, and when dead are cut up into mincemeat and
thrown to the dogs and vultures?'

To-morrow, when we enter Lhasa, we will have unveiled the last mystery
the of the East. There are no more forbidden cities which men have not
mapped and photographed. Our children will laugh at modern travellers'
tales. They will have to turn again to Gulliver and Haroun al Raschid.
And they will soon tire of these. For now that there are no real
mysteries, no unknown land of dreams, where there may still be genii and
mahatmas and bottle-imps, that kind of literature will be tolerated no
longer. Children will be sceptical and matter-of-fact and disillusioned,
and there will be no sale for fairy-stories any more.

But we ourselves are children. Why could we not have left at least one
city out of bounds?


    LHASA,
      _August 3._

We reached Lhasa to-day, after a march of seven miles, and camped
outside the city. As we approached, the road became an embankment across
a marsh. Butterflies and dragon-flies were hovering among the rushes,
clematis grew in the stonework by the roadside, cows were grazing in the
rich pastureland, redshanks were calling, a flight of teal passed
overhead; the whole scene was most homelike, save for the bare scarred
cliffs that jealously preclude a distant view of the city.

Some of us climbed the Chagpo Ri and looked down on the city. Lhasa lay
a mile in front of us, a mass of huddled roofs and trees, dominated by
the golden dome of the Jokhang Cathedral.

It must be the most hidden city on earth. The Chagpo Ri rises bluffly
from the river-bank like a huge rock. Between it and the Potala hill
there is a narrow gap not more than thirty yards wide. Over this is
built the Pargo Kaling, a typical Tibetan chorten, through which is the
main gateway into Lhasa. The city has no walls, but beyond the Potala,
to complete the screen, stretches a great embankment of sand right
across the valley to the hills on the north.

[Illustration]


    LHASA,
      _August 4._

An epoch in the world's history was marked to-day when Colonel
Younghusband entered the city to return the visit of the Chinese Amban.
He was accompanied by all the members of the mission, the war
correspondents, and an escort of two companies of the Royal Fusiliers
and the 2nd Mounted Infantry. Half a company of mounted infantry, two
guns, a detachment of sappers, and four companies of infantry were held
ready to support the escort if necessary.

In front of us marched and rode the Amban's escort--his bodyguard,
dressed in short loose coats of French gray, embroidered in black, with
various emblems; pikemen clad in bright red with black embroidery and
black pugarees; soldiers with pikes and scythes and three-pronged
spears, on all of which hung red banners with devices embroidered in
black.

We found the city squalid and filthy beyond description, undrained and
unpaved. Not a single house looked clean or cared for. The streets after
rain are nothing but pools of stagnant water frequented by pigs and dogs
searching for refuse. Even the Jokhang appeared mean and squalid at
close quarters, whence its golden roofs were invisible. There was
nothing picturesque except the marigolds and hollyhocks in pots and the
doves and singing-birds in wicker cages.

The few Tibetans we met in the street were strangely incurious. A baker
kneading dough glanced at us casually, and went on kneading. A woman
weaving barely looked up from her work.

The streets were almost deserted, perhaps by order of the authorities to
prevent an outbreak. But as we returned small crowds had gathered in the
doorways, women were peering through windows, but no one followed or
took more than a listless interest in us. The monks looked on sullenly.
But in most faces one read only indifference and apathy. One might think
the entry of a foreign army into Lhasa and the presence of English
Political Officers in gold-laced uniform and beaver hats were everyday
events.

The only building in Lhasa that is at all imposing is the Potala.

It would be misleading to say that the palace dominated the city, as a
comparison would be implied--a picture conveyed of one building standing
out signally among others. This is not the case.

The Potala is superbly detached. It is not a palace on a hill, but a
hill that is also a palace. Its massive walls, its terraces and bastions
stretch upwards from the plain to the crest, as if the great bluff rock
were merely a foundation-stone planted there at the divinity's nod. The
divinity dwells in the palace, and underneath, at the distance of a
furlong or two, humanity is huddled abjectly in squalid smut-begrimed
houses. The proportion is that which exists between God and man.

If one approached within a league of Lhasa, saw the glittering domes of
the Potala, and turned back without entering the precincts, one might
still imagine it an enchanted city, shining with turquoise and gold. But
having entered, the illusion is lost. One might think devout Buddhists
had excluded strangers in order to preserve the myth of the city's
beauty and mystery and wealth, or that the place was consciously
neglected and defaced so as to offer no allurements to heretics, just
as the repulsive women one meets in the streets smear themselves over
with grease and cutch to make themselves even more hideous than Nature
ordained.

The place has not changed since Manning visited it ninety years ago, and
wrote:--'There is nothing striking, nothing pleasing, in its appearance.
The habitations are begrimed with smut and dirt. The avenues are full of
dogs, some growling and gnawing bits of hide that lie about in
profusion, and emit a charnel-house smell; others limping and looking
livid; others ulcerated; others starved and dying, and pecked at by
ravens; some dead and preyed upon. In short, everything seems mean and
gloomy, and excites the idea of something unreal.' That is the Lhasa of
to-day. Probably it was the same centuries ago.

Above all this squalor the Potala towers superbly. Its golden roofs,
shining in the sun like tongues of fire, are a landmark for miles, and
must inspire awe and veneration in the hearts of pilgrims coming from
the desert parts of Tibet, Kashmir, and Mongolia to visit the sacred
city that Buddha has blessed.

The secret of romance is remoteness, whether in time or space. If we
could be thrown back to the days of Agincourt we should be enchanted at
first, but after a week should vote everything commonplace and dull.
Falstaff, the beery lout, would be an impossible companion, and Prince
Hal a tiresome young cub who wanted a good dressing-down. In travel,
too, as one approaches the goal, and the country becomes gradually
familiar, the husk of romance falls off. Childe Roland must have been
sadly disappointed in the Dark Tower; filth and familiarity very soon
destroyed the romance of Lhasa.

But romance still clings to the Potala. It is still remote. Like Imray,
its sacred inmate has achieved the impossible. Divinity or no, he has at
least the divine power of vanishing. In the material West, as we like to
call it, we know how hard it is for the humblest subject to disappear,
in spite of the confused hub of traffic and intricate network of
communications. Yet here in Lhasa, a city of dreamy repose, a King has
escaped, been spirited into the air, and nobody is any the wiser.

When we paraded the city yesterday, we made a complete circuit of the
Potala. There was no one, not even the humblest follower, so
unimaginative that he did not look up from time to time at the frowning
cliff and thousand sightless windows that concealed the unknown. Those
hidden corridors and passages have been for centuries, and are, perhaps,
at this very moment, the scenes of unnatural piety and crime.

Within the precincts of Lhasa the taking of life in any form is
sacrilege. Buddha's first law was, 'Thou shalt not kill'; and life is
held so sacred by his devout followers that they are careful not to
kill the smallest insect. Yet this palace, where dwells the divine
incarnation of the Bodhisat, the head of the Buddhist Church, must have
witnessed more murders and instigations to crime than the most
blood-stained castle of medieval Europe.

Since the assumption of temporal power by the fifth Grand Lama in the
middle of the seventeenth century, the whole history of the Tibetan
hierarchy has been a record of bloodshed and intrigue. The fifth Grand
Lama, the first to receive the title of Dalai, was a most unscrupulous
ruler, who secured the temporal power by inciting the Mongols to invade
Tibet, and received as his reward the kingship. He then established his
claim to the godhead by tampering with Buddhist history and writ. The
sixth incarnation was executed by the Chinese on account of his
profligacy. The seventh was deposed by the Chinese as privy to the
murder of the regent. After the death of the eighth, of whom I can learn
nothing, it would seem that the tables were turned: the regents
systematically murdered their charge, and the crime of the seventh Dalai
Lama was visited upon four successive incarnations. The ninth, tenth,
eleventh, and twelfth all died prematurely, assassinated, it is
believed, by their regents.

There are no legends of malmsey-butts, secret smotherings, and hired
assassins. The children disappeared; they were absorbed into the
Universal Essence; they were literally too good to live. Their regents
and protectors, monks only less sacred than themselves, provided that
the spirit in its yearning for the next state should not be long
detained in its mortal husk. No questions were asked. How could the
devout trace the comings and goings of the divine Avalokita, the Lord of
Mercy and Judgment, who ordains into what heaven or hell, demon, god,
hero, mollusc, or ape, their spirits must enter, according to their
sins?

So, when we reached Lhasa the other day, and heard that the thirteenth
incarnation had fled, no one was surprised. Yet the wonder remains. A
great Prince, a god to thousands of men, has been removed from his
palace and capital, no one knows whither or when. A ruler has
disappeared who travels with every appanage of state, inspiring awe in
his prostrate servants, whose movements, one would think, were watched
and talked about more than any Sovereign's on earth. Yet fear, or
loyalty, or ignorance keeps every subject tongue-tied.

We have spies and informers everywhere, and there are men in Lhasa who
would do much to please the new conquerors of Tibet. There are also
witless men, who have eyes and ears, but, it seems, no tongues.

But so far neither avarice nor witlessness has betrayed anything. For
all we know, the Dalai Lama may be still in his palace in some hidden
chamber in the rock, or maybe he has never left his customary
apartments, and still performs his daily offices in the Potala,
confident that there at least his sanctity is inviolable by unbelievers.

The British Tommy in the meanwhile parades the streets as indifferently
as if they were the New Cut or Lambeth Palace Road. He looks up at the
Potala, and says: 'The old bloke's done a bunk. Wish we'd got 'im; we
might get 'ome then.'


    LHASA,
      _August --._

We had been in Lhasa nearly three weeks before we could discover where
the Dalai Lama had fled. We know now that he left his palace secretly in
the night, and took the northern road to Mongolia. The Buriat, Dorjieff
met him at Nagchuka, on the verge of the great desert that separates
inhabited Tibet from Mongolia, 100 miles from Lhasa. On the 20th the
Amban told us that he had already left Nagchuka twelve days, and was
pushing on across the desert to the frontier.

I have been trying to find out something about the private life and
character of the Grand Lama. But asking questions here is fruitless; one
can learn nothing intimate. And this is just what one might expect. The
man continues a bogie, a riddle, undivinable, impersonal, remote. The
people know nothing. They have bowed before the throne as men come out
of the dark into a blinding light. Scrutiny in their view would be vain
and blasphemous. The Abbots, too, will reveal nothing; they will not and
dare not. When Colonel Younghusband put the question direct to a head
Lama in open durbar, 'Have you news of the Dalai Lama? Do you know where
he is?' the monk looked slowly to left and right, and answered, 'I know
nothing.' 'The ruler of your country leaves his palace and capital, and
you know nothing?' the Commissioner asked. 'Nothing,' answered the monk,
shuffling his feet, but without changing colour.

From various sources, which differ surprisingly little, I have a fairly
clear picture of the man's face and figure. He is thick-set, about five
feet nine inches in height, with a heavy square jaw, nose remarkably
long and straight for a Tibetan, eyebrows pronounced and turning upwards
in a phenomenal manner--probably trained so, to make his appearance more
forbidding--face pockmarked, general expression resolute and sinister.
He goes out very little, and is rarely seen by the people, except on his
annual visit to Depung, and during his migrations between the Summer
Palace and the Potala. He was at the Summer Palace when the messenger
brought the news that our advance was inevitable, but he went to the
Potala to put his house in order before projecting himself into the
unknown.

His face is the index of his character. He is a man of strong
personality, impetuous, despotic, and intolerant of advice in State
affairs. He is constantly deposing his Ministers, and has estranged from
himself a large section of the upper classes, both ecclesiastical and
official, owing to his wayward and headstrong disposition. As a child he
was so precociously acute and resolute that he survived his regent, and
so upset the traditional policy of murder, being the only one out of the
last five incarnations to reach his majority. Since he took the
government of the country into his own hands he has reduced the Chinese
suzerainty to a mere shadow, and, with fatal results to himself,
consistently insulted and defied the British. His inclination to a
rapprochement with Russia is not shared by his Ministers.

The only glimpse I have had into the man himself was reflected in a
conversation with the Nepalese Resident, a podgy little man, very ugly
and good-natured, with the manners of a French comedian and a face
generally expanded in a broad grin. He shook with laughter when I asked
him if he knew the Dalai Lama, and the idea was really intensely funny,
this mercurial, irreverent little man hobnobbing with the divine. 'I
have seen him,' he said, and exploded again. 'But what does he do all
day?' I asked. The Resident puckered up his brow, aping abstraction, and
began to wave his hand in the air solemnly with a slow circular
movement, mumbling '_Om man Padme om_' to the revolutions of an
imaginary praying-wheel. He was immensely pleased with the effort and
the effect it produced on a sepoy orderly. 'But has he no interests or
amusements?' I asked. The Resident could think of none. But he told me a
story to illustrate the dulness of the man, for whom he evidently had no
reverence. On his return from his last visit to India, the Maharaja of
Nepal had given him a phonograph to present to the Priest-King. The
impious toy was introduced to the Holy of Holies, and the Dalai Lama
walked round it uneasily as it emitted the strains of English band
music, and raucously repeated an indelicate Bhutanese song. After
sitting a long while in deep thought, he rose and said he could not live
with this voice without a soul; it must leave his palace at once. The
rejected phonograph found a home with the Chinese Amban, to whom it was
presented with due ceremonial the same day. 'The Lama is _gumar_,' the
Resident said, using a Hindustani word which may be translated,
according to our charity, by anything between 'boorish' and
'unenlightened.' I was glad to meet a man in this city of evasiveness
whose views were positive, and who was eager to communicate them.
Through him I tracked the shadow, as it were, of this impersonality, and
found that to many strangers in Lhasa, and perhaps to a few Lhasans
themselves, the divinity was all clay, a palpable fraud, a pompous and
puritanical dullard masquerading as a god.

For my own part, I think the oracle that counselled his flight wiser
than the statesmen who object that it was a political mistake. He has
lost his prestige, they say. But imagine him dragged into durbar as a
signatory, gazed at by profane eyes, the subject of a few days' gossip
and comment, then sunk into commonplace, stripped of his mystery like
this city of Lhasa, through which we now saunter familiarly, wondering
when we shall start again for the _wilds_.

To escape this ordeal he has fled, and to us, at least, his flight has
deepened the mystery that envelops him, and added to his dignity and
remoteness; to thousands of mystical dreamers it has preserved the
effulgence of his godhead unsoiled by contact with the profane world.

From our camp here the Potala draws the eye like a magnet. There is
nothing but sky and marsh and bleak hill and palace. When we look out of
our tents in the morning, the sun is striking the golden roof like a
beacon light to the faithful. Nearly every day in August this year has
opened fine and closed with storm-clouds gathering from the west,
through which the sun shines, bathing the eastern valley in a soft,
pearly light. The western horizon is dark and lowering, the eastern
peaceful and serene. In this division of darkness and light the Potala
stands out like a haven, not flaming now, but faintly luminous with a
restful mystic light, soothing enough to rob Buddhist metaphysics of its
pessimism and induce a mood, even in unbelievers, in which one is
content to merge the individual and become absorbed in the universal
spirit of Nature.

No wonder that, when one looks for mystery in Lhasa, one's thoughts
dwell solely on the Dalai Lama and the Potala. I cannot help dwelling on
the flight of the thirteenth incarnation. It plunges us into
medievalism. To my mind, there is no picture so romantic and engrossing
in modern history as that exodus, when the spiritual head of the
Buddhist Church, the temporal ruler of six millions, stole out of his
palace by night and was borne away in his palanquin, no one knows on
what errand or with what impotent rage in his heart. The flight was
really secret. No one but his immediate confidants and retainers, not
even the Amban himself, knew that he had gone. I can imagine the awed
attendants, the burying of treasure, the locking and sealing of chests,
faint lights flickering in the passages, hurried footsteps in the
corridors, dogs barking intermittently at this unwonted bustle--I feel
sure the Priest-King kicked one as he stepped on the terrace for the
last time. Then the procession by moonlight up the narrow valley to the
north, where the roar of the stream would drown the footsteps of the
palanquin-bearers.

A month afterwards I followed on his track, and stood on the Phembu Pass
twelve miles north of Lhasa, whence one looks down on the huge belt of
mountains that lie between the Brahmaputra and the desert, so packed
and huddled that their crests look like one continuous undulating plain
stretching to the horizon. Looking across the valley, I could see the
northern road to Mongolia winding up a feeder of the Phembu Chu. They
passed along here and over the next range, and across range after range,
until they reached the two conical snow-peaks that stand out of the
plain beside Tengri Nor, a hundred miles to the north. For days they
skirted the great lake, and then, as if they feared the Nemesis of our
offended Raj could pursue them to the end of the earth, broke into the
desert, across which they must be hurrying now toward the great mountain
chain of Burkhan Buddha, on the southern limits of Mongolia.


    LHASA,
      _August 19._

The Tibetans are the strangest people on earth. To-day I discovered how
they dispose of their dead.

To hold life sacred and benefit the creatures are the laws of Buddha,
which they are supposed to obey most scrupulously. And as they think
they may be reborn in any shape of mammal, bird, or fish, they are kind
to living things.

During the morning service the Lamas repeat a prayer for the minute
insects which they have swallowed inadvertently in their meat and drink,
and the formula insures the rebirth of these microbes in heaven.
Sometimes, when a Lama's life is despaired of, the monks will ransom a
yak or a bullock from the shambles, and keep him a pensioner in their
monastery, praying the good Buddha to spare the sick man's life for the
life ransomed. Yet they eat meat freely, all save the Gelug-pa, or
Reformed Church, and square their conscience with their appetite by the
pretext that the sin rests with the outcast assassin, the public
butcher, who will be born in the next incarnation as some tantalized
spirit or agonized demon. That, however, is his own affair.

But it is when a Tibetan dies that his charity to the creatures becomes
really practical. Then, by his own tacit consent when living, his body
is given as a feast to the dogs and vultures. This is no casual or
careless gift to avoid the trouble of burial or cremation. All creatures
who have a taste for these things are invited to the ceremony, and the
corpse is carved to their liking by an expert, who devotes his life to
the practice.

When a Tibetan dies he is left three days in his chamber, and a slit is
made in his skull to let his soul pass out. Then he is rolled into a
ball, wrapped in a sack, or silk if he is rich, packed into a jar or
basket, and carried along to the music of conch shells to the ceremonial
stone. Here a Lama takes the corpse out of its vessel and wrappings, and
lays it face downwards on a large flat slab, and the pensioners prowl or
hop round, waiting for their dole. They are quite tame. The Lamas stand
a little way apart, and see that strict etiquette is observed during
the entertainment. The carver begins at the ankle, and cuts upwards,
throwing little strips of flesh to the guests; the bones he throws to a
second attendant, who pounds them up with a heavy stone.

I passed the place to-day as I rode in from a reconnaissance. The slab
lies a stone's-throw to the left of the great northern road to Tengri
Nor and Mongolia, about two miles from the city.

A group of stolid vultures, too demoralized to range in search of
carrion, stood motionless on a rock above, waiting the next dispenser of
charity.

A few ravens hopped about sadly; they, too, were evidently pauperized.
One magpie was prying round in suspicious proximity, and dogs conscious
of shame slunk about without a bark in them, and nosed the ground
diligently. They are always there, waiting.

There was hardly a stain on the slab, so quick and eager are the
applicants for charity. Only a few rags lay around, too poor to be
carried away.

I have not seen the ceremony, and I have no mind to. My companion this
morning, a hardened young subaltern who was fighting nearly every day in
April, May, and June, and has seen more bloodshed than most veterans,
saw just as much as I have described. He then felt very ill, dug his
spurs into his horse, and rode away.




CHAPTER XIV

THE CITY AND ITS TEMPLES


By the first week in September I had visited all the most important
temples and monasteries in Lhasa. We generally went in parties of four
and five, and a company of Sikhs or Pathans was left in the courtyard in
case of accidents. We were well armed, as the monks were sullen, though
I do not think they were capable of any desperate fanaticism. If they
had had the abandon of dervishes, they might have rushed our camp long
before. They missed their chance at Gyantse, when a night attack pushed
home by overwhelming numbers could have wiped out our little garrison.
In Lhasa there was the one case of the Lama who ran amuck outside the
camp with the coat of mail and huge paladin's sword concealed beneath
his cloak, a medieval figure who thrashed the air with his brand like a
flail in sheer lust of blood. He was hanged medievally the next day
within sight of Lhasa. Since then the exploit has not been repeated, but
no one leaves the perimeter unarmed.

I have written of the squalor of the Lhasa streets. The environs of the
city are beautiful enough--willow groves intersected by clear-running
streams, walled-in parks with palaces and fish-ponds, marshes where the
wild-duck flaunt their security, and ripe barley-fields stretching away
to the hills. In September the trees were wearing their autumn tints,
the willows were mostly a sulphury yellow, and in the pools beneath the
red-stalked _polygonum_ and burnished dock-leaf glowed in brilliant
contrast. Just before dusk there was generally a storm in the valley,
which only occasionally reached the city; but the breeze stirred the
poplars, and the silver under the leaves glistened brightly against the
background of clouds. Often a rainbow hung over the Potala like a
nimbus.

On the Lingkhor, or circular road, which winds round Lhasa, we saw
pilgrims and devotees moving slowly along in prayer, always keeping the
Potala on their right hand. The road is only used for devotion. One
meets decrepit old women and men, halting and limping and slowly
revolving their prayer-wheels and mumbling charms. I never saw a healthy
yokel or robust Lama performing this rite. Nor did I see the pilgrims
whom one reads of as circumambulating the city on their knees by a
series of prostrations, bowing their heads in the dust and mud. All the
devotees are poor and ragged, and many blind. It seems that the people
of Lhasa do not begin to think of the next incarnation until they have
nothing left in this.

When one leaves the broad avenues between the walls of the groves and
pleasure-gardens, and enters the city, one's senses are offended by
everything that is unsightly and unclean. Pigs and pariah dogs are
nosing about in black oozy mud. The houses are solid but dirty. It is
hard to believe that they are whitewashed every year.

Close to the western entrance are the huts of the Ragyabas, beggars,
outcasts, and scavengers, who cut up the dead. The outer walls of their
houses are built of yak-horns.

Some of the houses had banks of turf built up outside the doors, with
borders of English flowers. The dwellings are mostly two or three
storied. Bird-cages hang from the windows.

The outside of the cathedral is not at all imposing. From the streets
one cannot see the golden roof, but only high blank walls, and at the
entrance a forest of dingy pillars beside a massive door. The door is
thrown open by a sullen monk, and a huge courtyard is revealed with more
dingy pillars that were once red. The entire wall is covered with
paintings of Buddhist myth and symbolism. The colours are subdued and
pleasing. In the centre of the yard are masses of hollyhocks, marigolds,
nasturtiums, and stocks. Beside the flower-borders is a pyramidical
structure in which are burnt the leaves of juniper and pine for
sacrifice.

The cloisters are two-storied; on the upper floor the monks have their
cells. Looking up, one can see hundreds of them gazing at us with
interest over the banisters. The upper story, as in every temple in
Tibet, is coated with a dark red substance which looks like rough paint,
but is really sacred earth, pasted on to evenly-clipped brushwood so as
to seem like a continuation of the masonry. On the face of the wall are
emblems in gilt, Buddhist symbols, like our Prince of Wales's feathers,
sun and crescent moon, and various other devices. A heavy curtain of
yak-hair hangs above the entrance-gate. On the roof are large cylinders
draped in yak-hair cloth topped by a crescent or a spear. Every
monastery and jong, and most houses in Tibet, are ornamented with these.
When one first sees them in the distance they look like men walking on
the roof.

Generally one ascends steps from the outer courtyard to the temple, but
in the Jokhang the floors are level. We enter the main temple by a dark
passage. The great doorway that opens into the street has been closed
behind us, but we leave a company of Pathans in the outer yard, as the
monks are sullen. Our party of four is armed with revolvers.

Service is being held before the great Buddhas as we enter, and a
thunderous harmony like an organ-peal breaks the interval for
meditation. The Abbot, who is in the centre, leans forward from his
chair and takes a bundle of peacock-feathers from a vase by his side. As
he points it to the earth there is a clashing of cymbals, a beating of
drums, and a blowing of trumpets and conch shells.

Then the music dies away like the reverberation of cannon in the hills.
The Abbot begins the chant, and the monks, facing each other like
singing-men in a choir, repeat the litany. They have extraordinary deep,
devotional voices, at once unnatural and impressive. The deepest bass of
the West does not approach it, and their sense of time is perfect.

The voice of the thousand monks is like the drone of some subterranean
monster, musically plaintive--the wail of the Earth God praying for
release to the God of the Skies.

The chant sounds like the endless repetition of the same formula; the
monks sway to it rhythmically. The temple would be dark if it were not
for the flickering of many thousands of votive candles and butter lamps.
Rows upon rows of them are placed before every shrine.

In an inner temple we found the three great images of the Buddhist
trinity--the Buddhas of the past, present, and future. The images were
greater than life-size, and set with jewels from foot to crown. As in
the cloisters of an English cathedral, there were little side-chapels,
which held sacred relics and shrines.

There were lamps of gold, and solid golden bowls set on altars, and
embossed salvers of copper and bronze.

A hanging grille of chainwork protected the precincts from sacrilege,
and an extended hand, bloody and menacing, was stretched from the wall,
terrible enough when suddenly revealed in that dim light to paralyze and
strike to earth with fright any profane thief who would dare to enter.

In the upper story we found a place which we called 'Hell,' where some
Lamas were worshipping the demon protectress of the Grand Lama. The
music here was harsh and barbaric. There were displayed on the pillars
and walls every freak of diabolical invention in the shape of scrolls
and devil-masks. The obscene object of this worship was huddled in a
corner--a dwarfish abortion, hideous and malignant enough for such
rites.

All about the Lamas' feet ran little white mice searching for grain.
They are fed daily, and are scrupulously reverenced, as in their frail
white bodies the souls of the previous guardians of the shrine are
believed to be reincarnated.

In another temple we found the Lamas holding service in worship of the
many-handed Buddha, Avalokitesvara. The picture of the god hung from
pillars by the altar. The chief Lamas were wearing peaked caps
picturesquely coloured with subdued blue and gold, and vestments of the
same hue. The lesser Lamas were bare-headed, and their hair was cropped.

When we first entered, an acolyte was pouring tea out of a massive
copper pot with a turquoise on the spout. Each monk received his tea in
a wooden bowl, and poured in barley-flour to make a paste.

During this interval no one spoke or whispered. The footsteps of the
acolytes were noiseless. Only the younger ones looked up at us
self-consciously as we watched them from a latticed window in the
corridor above.

Centuries ago this service was ordained, and the intervals appointed to
further the pursuit of truth through silence and abstraction. The monks
sat there quiet as stone. They had seen us, but they were seemingly
oblivious.

One wondered, were they pursuing truth or were they petrified by ritual
and routine? Did they regard us as immaterial reflexes, unsubstantial
and illusory, passing shadows of the world cast upon them by an
instant's illusion, to pass away again into the unreal, while they were
absorbed in the contemplation of changeless and universal truths? Or
were we noted as food for gossip and criticism when their self-imposed
ordeal was done?

The reek of the candles was almost suffocating. 'Thank God I am not a
Lama!' said a subaltern by my side. An Afridi Subadar let the butt of
his rifle clank from his boot to the pavement.

At these calls to sanity we clattered out of this unholy atmosphere of
dreams as if by an unquestioned impulse into the bright sunshine
outside.

In the bazaar there is a gay crowd. The streets are thronged by as
good-natured a mob as I have met anywhere. Sullenness and distrust have
vanished. Officers and men, Tommies, Gurkhas, Sikhs, and Pathans, are
stared at and criticised good-humouredly, and their accoutrements
fingered and examined. It is a bright and interesting crowd, full of
colour. In a corner of the square a street singer with a guitar and
dancing children attracts a small crowd. His voice is a rich baritone,
and he yodels like the Tyrolese. The crowd is parted by a Shape riding
past in gorgeous yellow silks and brocades, followed by a mounted
retinue whose head-gear would be the despair of an operatic hatter. They
wear red lamp-shades, yellow motor-caps, exaggerated Gainsboroughs,
inverted cooking-pots, coal-scuttles, and medieval helmets. And among
this topsy-turvy, which does not seem out of place in Lhasa, the most
eccentrically-hatted man is the Bhutanese Tongsa Penlop, who parades the
streets in an English gray felt hat.

The Mongolian caravan has arrived in Lhasa, after crossing a thousand
miles of desert and mountain tracks. The merchants and drivers saunter
about the streets, trying not to look too rustic. But they are easily
recognisable--tall, sinewy men, very independent in gait, with faces
burnt a dark brick red by exposure to the wind and sun. I saw one of
their splendidly robust women, clad in a sheepskin cloak girdled at the
waist, bending over a cloth stall, and fingering samples as if shopping
were the natural business of her life.

On fine days the wares are spread on the cobbles of the street, and the
coloured cloth and china make a pretty show against the background of
garden flowers. At the doors of the shops stand pale Nuwaris, whose
ancestors from Nepal settled in Lhasa generations ago. They wear a flat
brown cap, and a dull russet robe darker than that of the Lamas. The
Cashmiri shopkeepers are turbaned, and wear a cloak of butcher's blue.
They and the Nuwaris and the Chinese seem to monopolize the trade of the
city.

British officers haunt the bazaars searching for curios, but with very
little success. Lhasa has no artistic industries; nearly all the
knick-knacks come from India and China. Cloisonne ware is rare and
expensive, as one has to pay for the 1,800 miles of transport from
Peking. Religious objects are not sold. Turquoises are plentiful, but
coarse and inferior. Hundreds of paste imitations have been bought.
There is a certain sale for amulets, rings, bells, and ornaments for the
hair, but these and the brass and copper work can be bought for half the
price in the Darjeeling bazaar. The few relics we have found of the West
must have histories. In the cathedral there was a bell with the
inscription 'Te Deum laudamus,' probably a relic of the Capuchins. In
the purlieus of the city we found a bicycle without tyres, and a
sausage-machine made in Birmingham.

With the exception of the cathedral, most of the temples and monasteries
are on the outskirts of the city. There is a sameness about these places
of worship that would make description tedious. Only the Ramo-che and
Moru temples, which are solely devoted to sorcery, are different. Here
one sees the other soul-side of the people.

The Ramo-che is as dark and dingy as a vault. On each side of the
doorway are three gigantic tutelary demons. In the vestibule is a
collection of bows, arrows, chain-armour, stag-horns, stuffed animals,
scrolls, masks, skulls, and all the paraphernalia of devil-worship. On
the left is a dark recess where drums are being beaten by an unseen
choir.

A Lama stands, chalice in hand, before a deep aperture cut in the wall
like a buttery hatch, and illumined by dim, flickering candles, which
reveal a malignant female fiend. As a second priest pours holy water
into a chalice, the Lama raises it solemnly again and again, muttering
spells to propitiate the fury.

In the hall there are neither ornaments, gods, hanging canopies, nor
scrolls, as in the other temples. There is neither congregation nor
priests. The walls are apparently black and unpainted, but here and
there a lamp reveals a Gorgon's head, a fiend's eye, a square inch or
two of pigment that time has not obscured.

The place is immemorially old. There are huge vessels of carved metal
and stone, embossed, like the roof, with griffins and skulls, which
probably date back to before the introduction of Buddhism into Tibet,
and are survivals of the old Bon religion. There is nothing bright here
in colour or sound, nothing vivid or animated.

Stricken men and women come to remove a curse, vindictive ones to
inflict one, bereaved ones to pay the initiated to watch the adventures
of the soul in purgatory and guide it on its passage to the new birth,
while demons and furies are lurking to snatch it with fiery claws and
drag it to hell.

All these beings must be appeased by magic rites. So in the Ramo-che
there is no rapture of music, no communion with Buddha, no beatitudes,
only solitary priests standing before the shrines and mumbling
incantations, dismal groups of two or three seated Buddha-fashion on the
floor, and casting spells to exercise a deciding influence, as they
hope, in the continual warfare which is being waged between the tutelary
and malignant deities for the prize of a soul.

In the chancel of the temple, behind the altar, is a massive pile of
masonry stretching from floor to roof, under which, as folk believe, an
abysmal chasm leads down to hell. Round this there is a dark and narrow
passage which pilgrims circumambulate. The floor and walls are as
slippery as ice, worn by centuries of pious feet and groping hands. One
old woman in some urgent need is drifting round and round abstractedly.

Elsewhere one might linger in the place fascinated, but here in Lhasa
one moves among mysteries casually; for one cannot wonder, in this
isolated land where the elements are so aggressive, among these deserts
and wildernesses, heaped mountain chains, and impenetrable barriers of
snow, that the children of the soil believe that earth, air, and water
are peopled by demons who are struggling passionately over the destinies
of man.

I will not describe any more of the Lhasa temples. One shrine is very
like another, and details would be tedious. Personally, I do not care
for systematic sightseeing, even in Lhasa, but prefer to loiter about
the streets and bazaars, and the gardens outside the city, watch the
people, and enjoy the atmosphere of the place. The religion of Tibet is
picturesque enough in an unwholesome way, but to inquire how the layers
of superstition became added to the true faith, and trace the growth of
these spurious accretions, I leave to archaeologists. Perhaps one reader
in a hundred will be interested to know that a temple was built by the
illustrious Konjo, daughter of the Emperor Tai-Tsung and wife of King
Srong-btsan-gombo, but I think the other ninety and nine will be
devoutly thankful if I omit to mention it.

Yet one cannot leave the subject of the Lhasa monasteries without
remarking on the striking resemblance between Tibetan Lamaism and the
Romish Church. The resemblance cannot be accidental. The burning of
candles before altars, the sprinkling of holy water, the chanting of
hymns in alternation, the giving alms and saying Masses for the dead,
must have their origin in the West. We know that for many centuries
large Christian communities have existed in Western China near the
Tibetan frontier, and several Roman Catholic missionaries have
penetrated to Lhasa and other parts of Tibet during the last three
centuries. As early as 1641 the Jesuit Father Grueber visited Lhasa, and
recorded that the Lamas wore caps and mitres, that they used rosaries,
bells, and censers, and observed the practice of confession, penance,
and absolution. Besides these points common to Roman Catholicism, he
noticed the monastic and conventual system, the tonsure, the vows of
poverty, chastity, and obedience, the doctrine of incarnation and the
Trinity, and the belief in purgatory and paradise.[18]

  [18] It is interesting to compare Grueber's account with the journal
      of Father Rubruquis, who travelled in Mongolia in the thirteenth
      century. In 1253 he wrote of the Lamas:

      'All their priests had their heads shaven quite over, and they are
      clad in saffron-coloured garments. Being once shaven, they lead an
      unmarried life from that time forward, and they live a hundred or
      two of them in one cloister.... They have with them also,
      whithersoever they go, a certain string, with a hundred or two
      hundred nutshells thereupon, much like our beads which we carry
      about with us; and they do always mutter these words, "Om mani
      pectavi (om mani padme hom)"--"God, Thou knowest," as one of them
      expounded it to me; and so often do they expect a reward at God's
      hands as they pronounce these words in remembrance of God.... I
      made a visit to their idol temple, and found certain priests
      sitting in the outward portico, and those which I saw seemed, by
      their shaven beards, as if they had been our countrymen; they wore
      certain ornaments upon their heads like mitres made of paper.'

We occasionally saw a monk with the refined ascetic face of a Roman
Cardinal. Te Rinpoche, the acting regent, was an example. One or two
looked as if they might be humane and benevolent--men who might make one
accept the gentle old Lama in 'Kim' as a not impossible fiction; but
most of them appeared to me to be gross and sottish. I must confess that
during the protracted negociations at Lhasa I had little sympathy with
the Lamas. It is a mistake to think that they keep their country closed
out of any religious scruple. Buddhism in its purest form is not
exclusive or fanatical. Sakya Muni preached a missionary religion. He
was Christlike in his universal love and his desire to benefit all
living creatures. But Buddhism in Tibet has become more and more
degenerate, and the Lamaist Church is now little better than a political
mechanism whose chief function is the uncompromising exclusion of
foreigners. The Lamas know that intercourse with other nations must
destroy their influence with the people.

And Tibet is really ruled by the Lamas. Outside Lhasa are the three
great monasteries of Depung, Sera, and Gaden, whose Abbots, backed by a
following of nearly 30,000 armed and bigoted monks, maintain a
preponderating influence in the national assembly.[19] These men wield a
greater influence than the four Shapes or the Dalai Lama himself, and
practically dictate the policy of the country.

  [19] 'It may be asked how the monastic influence is brought to bear
      on a Government in which three out of the four principal
      Ministers (Shape) are laymen. The fact seems to be that lying
      behind the Tak Lama, the Shapes, and all the machinery of the
      Tibetan Government, as we have hitherto been acquainted with it,
      there is an institution called the "Tsong-du-chembo," or
      "Tsong-dugze-tsom," which may reasonably be compared with what we
      call a "National Assembly," or, as the word implies, "Great
      Assembly." It is constituted of the Kenpas or Abbots of the three
      great monasteries, representatives from the four lings or small
      monasteries actually in Lhasa city, and from all the other
      monasteries in the province of U; and besides this, all the
      officials of the Government are present--laymen and ecclesiastics
      alike--to the number of several hundreds.'--Captain O'Connor's
      Diary at Khamba Jong (Tibetan Blue-Book, 1904).

The three great monasteries are of ancient foundation, and intimately
associated with the history of the country. They are, in fact,
ecclesiastical Universities,[20] and resemble in many ways our
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge. The Universities are divided into
colleges. Each has its own Abbot, or Master, and disciplinary staff. The
undergraduates, or candidates for ordination, must attend lectures and
chapels, and pass examinations in set books, which they must learn from
cover to cover before they can take their degree. Failure in
examination, as well as breaches in discipline and manners, are punished
by flogging. Corporal punishment is also dealt out to the unfortunate
tutors, who are held responsible for their pupils' omissions. If a
candidate repeatedly fails to pass his examination, he is expelled from
the University, and can only enter again on payment of increased fees.
The three leading Universities are empowered to confer degrees which
correspond to our Bachelor and Doctor of Divinity. The monks live in
rooms in quadrangles, and have separate messing clubs, but meet for
general worship in the cathedral. If their code is strictly observed,
which I very much doubt, prayers and tedious religious observances must
take up nearly their whole day. But the Lamas are adept casuists, and
generally manage to evade the most irksome laws of their scriptures.

  [20] I have derived most of my information regarding the discipline
      and constitution of Depung from 'Lamaism in Tibet,' by Colonel
      Augustine Waddell, who accompanied the expedition as Archaeologist
      and Principal Medical Officer.

Soon after our arrival in Lhasa we had occasion to visit Depung, which
is probably the largest monastery in the world. It stands in a natural
amphitheatre in the hillside two miles from the city, a huge collection
of temples and monastic buildings, larger, and certainly more imposing,
than most towns in Tibet.

The University was founded in 1414, during the reign of the first Grand
Lama of the Reformed Church. It is divided into four colleges, and
contains nearly 8,000 monks, amongst whom there is a large Mongolian
community. The fourth Grand Lama, a Mongolian, is buried within the
precincts. The fifth and greatest Dalai Lama, who built the Potala and
was the first to combine the temporal and spiritual power, was an Abbot
of Depung. The reigning Dalai Lama visits Depung annually, and a palace
in the university is reserved for his use. The Abbot, of course, is a
man of very great political influence.

All these facts I have collected to show that the monks have some reason
to be proud of their monastery as the first in Tibet. One may forgive
them a little pride in its historic distinctions. Even in our own alma
mater we meet the best of men who seem to gather importance from old
traditions and association with a long roll of distinguished names.
What, then, can we expect of this Tibetan community, the most
conservative in a country that has prided itself for centuries on its
bigotry and isolation--men who are ignorant of science, literature,
history, politics, everything, in fact, except their own narrow
priestcraft and confused metaphysics? We call the Tibetan 'impossible.'
His whole education teaches him to be so, and the more educated he is
the more 'impossible' he becomes.

Imagine, then, the consternation at Depung when a body of armed men rode
up to the monastery and demanded supplies. We had refrained from
entering the monasteries of Lhasa and its neighbourhood at the request
of the Abbots and Shapes, but only on condition that the monks should
bring in supplies, which were to be paid for at a liberal rate. The
Abbots failed to keep their promise, supplies were not forthcoming, and
it became necessary to resort to strong measures. An officer was sent to
the gate with an escort of three men and a letter saying that if the
provisions were not handed over within an hour we would break into the
monastery and take them, if necessary, by force. The messengers were met
by a crowd of excited Lamas, who refused to accept the letter, waved
them away, and rolled stones towards them menacingly, as an intimation
that they were prepared to fight. As the messengers rode away the tocsin
was heard, warning the villagers, women and children, who were gathered
outside with market produce, to depart.

General Macdonald with a strong force of British and native troops drew
up within 1,300 yards of the monastery, guns were trained on Depung, the
infantry were deployed, and we waited the expiration of the period of
grace intimated in the letter. An hour passed by, and it seemed as if
military operations were inevitable, when groups of monks came out with
a white flag, carrying baskets of eggs and a complimentary scarf.

Even in the face of this military display they began to temporize. They
bowed and chattered and protested in their usual futile manner, and
condescended so far as to say they would talk the matter over if we
retired at once, and send the supplies to our camp the next day, if they
came to a satisfactory decision. The Lamas are trained to wrangle and
dispute and defer and vacillate.[21] They seem to think that speech was
made only to evade conclusions. The curt ultimatum was repeated, and the
deputation was removed gently by two impassive sepoys, still chattering
like a flock of magpies.

  [21] The highest degree which is conferred on the Lamas by their
      Universities is the Rabs-jam-pa (verbally overflowing
      endlessly).--Waddell, 'Lamaism in Tibet.'

In the meanwhile we sat and waited and smoked our pipes, and wondered if
there were going to be another Guru. It seemed the most difficult thing
in the world to save these poor fools from the effects of their
obstinate folly. The time-limit had nearly expired, the two batteries
were advanced 300 yards, the gunners took their sights again, and
trained the 10-pounders on the very centre of the monastery.

There were only five minutes more, and we were stirred, according to our
natures, by pity or exasperation or the swift primitive instinct for the
dramatic, which sweeps away the humanities, and leaves one to the
conflict of elemental passions.

At last a thin line of red-robed monks was seen to issue from the gate
and descend the hill, each carrying a bag of supplies. The crisis was
over, and we were spared the necessity of inflicting a cruel
punishment. I waited to see the procession, a group of sullen
ecclesiastics, who had never bowed or submitted to external influence in
their lives, carrying on their backs their unwilling contribution to the
support of the first foreign army that had ever intruded on their
seclusion. It must have been the most humiliating day in the history of
Depung.

It must be admitted that it was not a moment when the monks looked their
best. Yet I could not help comparing their appearance with that of the
simple honest-looking peasantry. Many of them looked sottish and
degraded; other faces showed cruelty and cunning; their brows were
contracted as if by perpetual scheming; some were almost simian in
appearance, and looked as if they could not harbour a thought that was
not animal or sensual. They waddled in their walk, and their right arms,
exposed from the shoulder, looked soft and flabby, as if they had never
done an honest day's work in their life.

One man had the face of an inquisitor--round, beady eyes, puffed cheeks,
and thin, tightly-shut mouth.

How they hated us! If one of us fell into their hands secretly, I have
no doubt they would rack him limb from limb, or cut him into small
pieces with a knife.

The Depung incident shows how difficult it was to make any headway with
the Tibetans without recourse to arms. We were present in the city to
insist on compliance with our demands. But an amicable settlement seemed
hopeless, and we could not stay in Lhasa indefinitely. What if these
monks were to say, 'You may stay here if you like. We will not molest
you, but we refuse to accept your terms'? We could only retire or train
our guns on the Potala. Retreat was, of course, impossible.




CHAPTER XV

THE SETTLEMENT


The political deadlock continued until within a week of the signing of
the treaty.

For a long time no responsible delegates were forthcoming. The Shapes,
who were weak men and tools of the fugitive Dalai Lama, protested that
any treaty they might make with us would result in their disgrace. If,
on the other hand, they made no treaty, and we were compelled to occupy
the Potala, or take some other step offensive to the hierarchy, their
ruin would be equally certain. Ruin, in fact, faced them in any case.

The highest officials in Tibet visited Colonel Younghusband, expressed
their eagerness to see differences amicably settled, and, when asked to
arrange the simplest matter, said they were afraid to take on themselves
the responsibility. And this was not merely astute evasiveness. It was
really a fact that there was no one in Lhasa who dared commit himself by
an action or assurance of any kind.

Yet there existed some kind of irresponsible disorganized machine of
administration which sometimes arrived at a decision about matters of
the moment. The National Assembly was sufficiently of one mind to depose
and imprison the Ta Lama, the ecclesiastical member of Council. His
disgrace was due to his failure to persuade us to return to Gyantse.

The National Assembly held long sessions daily, and after more than a
week of discussion they began to realize that there was at least one aim
that was common to them all--that the English should be induced to leave
Lhasa. They then appointed accredited delegates, whose decisions, they
said, would be entirely binding on the Dalai Lama, should he come back.
The Dalai Lama had left his seal with Te Rinpoche, the acting regent,
but with no authority to use it.

The terms of the treaty were disclosed to the Amban, who communicated
them to the Tsong-du. The Tsong-du submitted the draft of their reply to
the Amban before it was presented to Colonel Younghusband. The first
reply of the Assembly to our demands ought to be preserved as a historic
epitome of national character. The indemnity, they said, ought to be
paid by us, and not by them. We had invaded their territory, and spoiled
their monasteries and lands, and should bear the cost. The question of
trade marts they were obstinately opposed to; but, provided we carried
out the other terms of the treaty to their satisfaction, they would
consider the advisability of conceding us a market at Rinchengong, a
mile and a half beyond the present one at Yatung. They would not be
prepared, however, to make this concession unless we undertook to pay
for what we purchased on the spot, to respect their women, and to
refrain from looting. Road-making they could not allow, as the blasting
and upheaval of soil offended their gods and brought trouble on the
neighbourhood. The telegraph-wire was against their customs, and
objectionable on religious grounds. With regard to foreign relations,
they had never had any dealings with an outside race, and they intended
to preserve this policy so long as they were not compelled to seek
protection from another Power.

The tone of the reply indicates the attitude of the Tibetans. Obstinacy
could go no further. The document, however, was not forwarded officially
to the Commissioner, but returned to the Assembly by the Amban as too
impertinent for transmission. The Amban explained to Colonel
Younghusband that the Tibetans regarded the negociations in the light of
a huckster's bargain. They did not realize that we were in a position to
enforce terms, and that our demands were unconditional, but thought that
by opening negociations in an unconciliatory manner, and asking for more
than they expected, they might be able to effect a compromise and escape
the full exaction of the penalty.

The first concession on the part of the Tibetans was the release of the
two Lachung men, natives of Sikkim and British subjects, who had been
captured and beaten at Tashilunpo in July, 1903, while the Commission
was waiting at Khamba Jong. Their liberation was one of the terms of the
treaty. Colonel Younghusband made the release the occasion of an
impressive durbar, in which he addressed a solemn warning to the
Tibetans on the sanctity of the British subject. The imprisonment of the
two men from Sikkim, he said, was the most serious offence of which the
Tibetans had been guilty. It was largely on that account that the Indian
Government had decided to advance to Gyantse. The prisoners were brought
straight from the dungeon to the audience-hall. They had been
incarcerated in a dark underground cell for more than a year, and they
knew nothing of the arrival of the English in Lhasa until the morning
when Colonel Younghusband told them they were free by the command of the
King-Emperor. I shall never forget the scene--the bewilderment and
delight of the prisoners, their drawn, blanched features, and the sullen
acquiescence of the Tibetans, who learnt for the first time the meaning
of the old Roman boast, 'Civis Romanus sum.'

On August 20 Colonel Younghusband received through the Amban the second
reply to our demands. The tone of the delegates was still impossible,
though slightly modified and more reasonable. Several durbars followed,
but they did not advance the negociations. Instead of discussing matters
vital to the settlement, the Tibetan representatives would arrive with
all the formalities and ceremonial of durbar to beg us not to cut grass
in a particular field, or to request the return of the empty grain-bags
to the monasteries. The Amban said that he had met with nothing but
shuffling from the 'barbarians' during his term of office. They were
'dark and cunning adepts at prevarication, children in the conduct of
affairs.'

The counsellors, however, began to show signs of wavering. They were
evidently eager to come to terms, though they still hoped to reduce our
demands, and tried to persuade the Commissioner to agree to conditions
proposed by themselves.

Throughout this rather trying time our social relations with the
Tibetans were of a thoroughly friendly character. The Shapes and one or
two of the leading monks attended race-meetings and gymkanas, put their
money on the totalizator, and seemed to enjoy their day out. When their
ponies ran in the visitors' race, the members of Council temporarily
forgot their stiffness, waddled to the rails to see the finish, and were
genuinely excited. They were entertained at lunch and tea by Colonel
Younghusband, and were invited to a Tibetan theatrical performance given
in the courtyard of the Lhalu house, which became the headquarters of
the mission. On these occasions they were genial and friendly, and
appreciated our hospitality.

The humbler folk apparently bore us no vindictiveness, and showed no
signs of resenting our presence in the city. Merchants and storekeepers
profited by the exaggerated prices we paid for everything we bought.
Trade in Lhasa was never brisker. The poor were never so liberally
treated. One day a merry crowd of them were collected on the plain
outside the city, and largess was distributed to more than 11,000. Every
babe in arms within a day's march of Lhasa was brought to the spot, and
received its dole of a tanka (5d.).

I think the Tibetans were genuinely impressed with our humanity during
this time, and when, on the eve of our departure, the benign and
venerable Te Rinpoche held his hands over General Macdonald in
benediction, and solemnly blessed him for his clemency and moderation in
sparing the monasteries and people, no one doubted his thankfulness was
sincere. The golden Buddha he presented to the General was the highest
pledge of esteem a Buddhist priest could bestow.

When, on September 1, the Tibetans, after nearly a month's palaver, had
accepted only two of the terms of the treaty,[22] Colonel Younghusband
decided that the time had come for a guarded ultimatum. He told the
delegates that, if the terms were not accepted in full within a week, he
would consult General Macdonald as to what measures it would be
necessary to take to enforce compliance. Their submission was complete,
and immediate.

  [22] The liberation of the Lachung men and the destruction of the
      Yatung and Gob-sorg barriers.

Colonel Younghusband had achieved a diplomatic triumph of the highest
order. If the ultimatum had been given three weeks, or even a fortnight,
earlier, I believe the Tibetans would have resisted. When we reached
Lhasa on August 3, the Nepalese Resident said that 10,000 armed monks
had been ready to oppose us if we had decided to quarter ourselves
inside the city, and they had only dispersed when the Shapes who rode
out to meet us at Toilung returned with assurances that we were going to
camp outside. At one time it seemed impossible to make any progress with
negociations without further recourse to arms. But patience and
diplomacy conquered. We had shown the Tibetans we could reach Lhasa and
yet respect their religion, and left an impression that our strength was
tempered with humanity.

The treaty was signed in the Potala on August 7, in the Dalai Lama's
throne-room. The Tibetan signatories were the acting regent, who affixed
the seal of the Dalai Lama; the four Shapes; the Abbots of the three
great monasteries, Depung, Sera, and Gaden; and a representative of the
National Assembly. The Amban was not empowered to sign, as he awaited
'formal sanction' from Peking. Lest the treaty should be afterwards
disavowed through a revolution in Government, the signatories included
representatives of every organ of administration in Lhasa.

On the afternoon of the 7th our troops lined the causeway on the west
front of the Potala. Towards the summit the rough and broken road became
an ascent of slippery steps, where one had to walk crabwise to prevent
falling, and plant one's feet on the crevices of the age-worn
flagstones, where grass and dock-leaves gave one a securer foothold.
Then through the gateway and along a maze of slippery passages, dark as
Tartarus, but illumined dimly by flickering butter lamps held by aged
monks, impassive and inscrutable. In the audience-chamber Colonel
Younghusband, General Macdonald, and the Chinese Amban sat beneath the
throne of the Dalai Lama. On either side of them were the British
Political Officer and Tibetan signatories. In another corner were the
Tongsa Penlop of Bhutan and his lusty big-boned men, and the dapper
little Nepalese Resident, wreathed in smiles. British officers sat round
forming a circle. Behind them stood groups of Tommies, Sikhs, Gurkhas,
and Pathans. In the centre the treaty, a voluminous scroll, was laid on
a table, the cloth of which was a Union Jack.

When the terms had been read in Tibetan, the signatories stepped forward
and attached their seals to the three parallel columns written in
English, Tibetan, and Chinese. They showed no trace of sullenness and
displeasure. The regent smiled as he added his name.

After the signing Colonel Younghusband addressed the Tibetans:

'The convention has been signed. We are now at peace, and the
misunderstandings of the past are over. The bases have been laid for
mutual good relations in the future.

'In the convention the British Government have been careful to avoid
interfering in the smallest degree with your religion. They have annexed
no part of your territory, have made no attempt to interfere in your
internal affairs, and have fully recognised the continued suzerainty of
the Chinese Government. They have merely sought to insure--

'1. That you shall abide by the treaty made by the Amban in 1890.

'2. That trade relations between India and Tibet, which are no less
advantageous to you than to us, should be established as they have been
with every other part of the Chinese Empire, and with every other
country in the world except Tibet.

'3. That British representatives should be treated with respect in
future.

'4. That you should not depart from your traditional policy in regard to
political relations with other countries.

'The treaty which has now been made I promise you on behalf of the
British Government we will rigidly observe, but I also warn you that we
will as rigidly enforce it. Any infringement of it will be severely
punished in the end, and any obstruction of trade, any disrespect or
injury to British subjects, will be noticed and reparation exacted.

'We treat you well when you come to India. We do not take a single rupee
in Customs duties from your merchants. We allow any of you to travel and
reside wherever you will in India. We preserve the ancient buildings of
the Buddhist faith, and we expect that when we come to Tibet we shall be
treated with no less consideration and respect than we show you in
India.

'You have found us bad enemies when you have not observed your treaty
obligations and shown disrespect to the British Raj. You will find us
equally good friends if you keep the treaty and show us civility.

'I hope that the peace which has at this moment been established between
us will last for ever, and that we may never again be forced to treat
you as enemies.

'As the first token of peace I will ask General Macdonald to release all
prisoners of war. I expect that you on your part will set at liberty all
those who have been imprisoned on account of dealings with us.'

At the conclusion of the speech, which was interpreted to the Tibetans
sentence by sentence, and again in Chinese, the Shapes expressed their
intention to observe the treaty faithfully.[23]

  [23] The following is a draft of the terms as communicated by _The
      Times_ Correspondent at Peking. The terms have not yet been
      disclosed in their final form, but I understand that Dr.
      Morrison's summary contains the gist of them:

      '1. Tibetans to re-erect boundary-stones at the Tibet frontier.

      '2. Tibetans to establish marts at Gyangtse, Yatung, Gartok, and
      facilitate trade with India.

      '3. Tibet to appoint a responsible official to confer with the
      British officials regarding the alteration of any objectionable
      features of the treaty of 1893.

      '4. No further Customs duties to be levied upon merchandise after
      the tariff shall have been agreed upon by Great Britain and the
      Tibetans.

      '5. No Customs stations to be established on the route between the
      Indian frontier and the three marts mentioned above, where
      officials shall be appointed to facilitate diplomatic and
      commercial intercourse.

      '6. Tibet to pay an indemnity of L500,000 in three annual
      instalments, the first to be paid on January 1, 1906.

      '7. British troops to occupy the Chumbi Valley for three years, or
      until such time as the trading posts are satisfactorily
      established and the indemnity liquidated in full.

      '8. All forts between the Indian frontier on routes traversed by
      merchants from the interior of Tibet to be demolished.

      '9. Without the consent of Great Britain no Tibetan territory
      shall be sold, leased, or mortgaged to any foreign Power
      whatsoever; no foreign Power whatsoever shall be permitted to
      concern itself with the administration of the government of Tibet,
      or any other affairs therewith connected; no foreign Power shall
      be permitted to send either official or non-official persons to
      Tibet--no matter in what pursuit they may be engaged--to assist in
      the conduct of Tibetan affairs; no foreign Power shall be
      permitted to construct roads or railways or erect telegraphs or
      open mines anywhere in Tibet.

      'In the event of Great Britain's consenting to another Power
      constructing roads or railways, opening mines, or erecting
      telegraphs, Great Britain will make a full examination on her own
      account for carrying out the arrangements proposed. No real
      property or land containing minerals or precious metals in Tibet
      shall be mortgaged, exchanged, leased, or sold to any foreign
      Power.

      '10. Of the two versions of the treaty, the English text to be
      regarded as operative.'

      The ninth clause, which precludes Russian interference and
      consequent absorption, is of course the most vital article of the
      treaty.

The next day in durbar a scene was enacted which reminded one of a play
before the curtain falls, when the characters are called on the stage
and apprised of their changed fortunes, and everything ends happily.
Among the mutual pledges and concessions and evidences of goodwill that
followed we secured the release of the political captives who had been
imprisoned on account of assistance rendered British subjects. An old
man and his son were brought into the hall looking utterly bowed and
broken. The old man's chains had been removed from his limbs that
morning for the first time in twenty years, and he came in blinking at
the unaccustomed light like a blind man miraculously restored to sight.
He had been the steward of the Phalla estate near Dongste; his offence
was hospitality shown to Sarat Chandra Das in 1884. An old monk of Sera
was released next. He was so weak that he had to be supported into the
room. His offence was that he had been the teacher of Kawa Guchi, the
Japanese traveller who visited Lhasa in the disguise of a Chinese
pilgrim. We who looked on these sad relics of humanity felt that their
restitution to liberty was in itself sufficient to justify our advance
to Lhasa.

On August 14 the Amban posted in the streets of Lhasa a proclamation
that the Dalai Lama was deposed by the authority of the Chinese Emperor,
owing to the desertion of his trust at a national crisis. Temporal power
was vested in the hands of the National Assembly and the regent, while
the spiritual power was transferred to Panchen Rinpoche, the Grand Lama
of Tashilunpo, who is venerated by Buddhists as the incarnation of
Amitabha, and held as sacred as the Dalai Lama himself. The Tashe Lama,
as he is called in Europe, has always been more accessible than the
Dalai Lama. It was to the Tashe Lama that Warren Hastings despatched the
missions of Bogle and Turner, and the intimate friendship that grew up
between George Bogle and the reigning incarnation is perhaps the only
instance of such a tie existing between an Englishman and a Tibetan. The
officials of the Tsang province, where the Tashe Lama resides, are not
so bigoted as the Lhasa oligarchy. It was a minister of the Tashe Lama
who invited Sarat Chandra Das to Shigatze, learnt the Roman characters
from him, and sat for hours listening to his talk about languages and
scientific developments. The exile of this man, and the execution of the
Abbot of Dongste, who was drowned in the Tsangpo, for hospitality shown
to the Bengali explorer, are the most recent marks of the difference in
attitude between the Lhasans and the people of Tsang.

The present incarnation has not shown himself bitterly anti-foreign.
During the operations in Tibet he remained as neutral and inactive as
safety permitted, and it is not impossible that the hope of Mr. Ular may
be realized, and an Anglophile Buddhist Pope established at Shigatze.
Herein lies a possible simplification of the Tibetan problem, which has
already lost some of its complexity by the flight of the Dalai Lama to
Urga.

In estimating the practical results of the Tibet Expedition, we should
not attach too much importance to the exact observance of the terms of
the treaty. Trade marts and roads, and telegraph-wires, and open
communications are important issues, but they were never our main
objective. What was really necessary was to make the Tibetans understand
that they could not afford to trifle with us. The existence of a
truculent race on our borders who imagined that they were beyond the
reach of our displeasure was a source of great political danger. We
went to Tibet to revolutionize the whole policy of the Lhasa oligarchy
towards the Indian Government.

The practical results of the mission are these: The removal of a ruler
who threatened our security and prestige on the North-East frontier by
overtures to a foreign Power; the demonstration to the Tibetans that
this Power is unable to support them in their policy of defiance to
Great Britain, and that their capital is not inaccessible to British
troops.

We have been to Lhasa once, and if necessary we can go there again. The
knowledge of this is the most effectual leverage we could have in
removing future obstruction. In dealing with people like the Tibetans,
the only sure basis of respect is fear. They have flouted us for nearly
twenty years because they have not believed in our power to punish their
defiance. Out of this contempt grew the Russian menace, to remove which
was the real object of the Tibet Expedition. Have we removed it? Our
verdict on the success or failure of Lord Curzon's Tibetan policy
should, I think, depend on the answer to this question.

There can be no doubt that the despatch of British troops to Lhasa has
shown the Tibetans that Russia is a broken reed, her agents utterly
unreliable, and her friendship nothing but a hollow pretence. The
British expedition has not only frustrated her designs in Tibet: it has
made clear to the whole of Central Asia the insincerity of her pose as
the Protector of the Buddhist Church.

But the Tibetans are not an impressionable people. Their conduct after
the campaign of 1888 shows us that they forget easily. To make the
results of the recent expedition permanent, Lord Curzon's original
policy should be carried out in full, and a Resident with troops left in
Lhasa. It will be objected that this forward policy is too fraught with
possibilities of political trouble, and too costly to be worth the end
in view. But half-measures are generally more expensive and more
dangerous in the long-run than a bold policy consistently carried out.

We have left a trade agent at Gyantse with an escort of fifty men, as
well as four or five companies at Chumbi and Phari Jong, at distances of
100 and 130 miles. But no vigilance at Gyantse can keep the Indian
Government informed of Russian or Chinese intrigue in Lhasa. Lhasa is
Tibet, and there alone can we watch the ever-shifting pantomime of
Tibetan politics and the manoeuvres of foreign Powers. If we are not
to lose the ground we have gained, the foreign relations of Tibet must
stand under British surveillance.

But putting aside the question of vigilance, our prestige requires that
there should be a British Resident in Lhasa. That we have left an
officer at Gyantse, and none at Lhasa, will be interpreted by the
Tibetans as a sign of weakness.

Then, again, diplomatic relations with Tibet can only continue a farce
while we are ignorant of the political situation in Lhasa. Influences in
the capital grow and decay with remarkable rapidity. The Lamas are
adepts in intrigue. When we left Lhasa, the best-informed of our
political officers could not hazard a guess as to what party would be in
power in a month's time, whether the Dalai Lama would come back, or in
what manner his deposition would affect our future relations with the
country. We only knew that our departure from Lhasa was likely to be the
signal for a conflict of political factions that would involve a state
of confusion. The Dalai Lama still commanded the loyalty of a large body
of monks. Sera Monastery was known to support him, while Gaden, though
it contained a party who favoured the deposed Shata Shape, numbered many
adherents to his cause. The only political figure who had no following
or influence of any kind was the unfortunate Amban.[24] Whatever party
gains the upper hand, the position of the Chinese Amban is not enviable.

  [24] The Amban or Chinese Resident in Lhasa is in the same position
      as a British Resident in the Court of a protected chief in India.
      Of late years, however, the Amban's authority has been little
      more than nominal.

At the moment of writing China has not signed the treaty; she may do so
yet, but her signature is not of vital importance. The Tibetans will
decide for themselves whether it is safe to provoke our hostility. If
they decide to defy us, then of course trouble may arise from their
refusing to recognise the treaty of 1904 on the pretext that it was not
signed by the Amban.

It will be remembered that after the campaign of 1888 the convention we
drew up in Calcutta was signed by China, and afterwards repudiated by
Tibet. For many years the Tibetans have ignored China's suzerainty, and
refused to be bound by a convention drawn up by her in their behalf; but
now the plea of suzerainty is convenient, they may use it as a pretext
to escape their new obligations.

It is even possible that the Amban advised the Tibetan delegates in
Lhasa to agree to any terms we asked, if they wanted to be rid of us, as
any treaty we might make with them would be invalid without the
acquiescence of China. Thus the 'vicious circle' revolves, and a more
admirable political device from the Chino-Tibetan point of view cannot
be conceived.

But the permanence of the new conditions in Tibet does not depend on
China. If the Tibetans think they are still able to flout us, they will
do so, and one pretext will serve as well as another. But if they have
learnt that our displeasure is dangerous they will take care not to
provoke it again.

The success or failure of the recent expedition depends on the
impression we have left on the Tibetans. If that impression is to be
lasting, we must see that our interests are well guarded in Lhasa, or in
a few months we may lose the ground we gained, with what cost and danger
to ourselves only those who took part in the expedition can understand.

THE END

BILLING AND SONS LIMITED, GUILDFORD.




Transcriber's Note:


The following modifications have been made to the text.

 Contents, Chapter XII: 'Kalimpang' replaced with 'Kalimpong'.
    British Bhutan--Kalimpong--'The Bhutia tat'

 Page 46: The comma after 'services' replaced with a period.
    for his good services. When I asked him how he stood with
        the Tibetan Government

 Page 248: 'the of' replaced with 'of the'.
    mystery of the East.

 Page 277: 'a' replaced with 'as'.
    As early as 1641






End of Project Gutenberg's The Unveiling of Lhasa, by Edmund Candler

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UNVEILING OF LHASA ***

***** This file should be named 33359.txt or 33359.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/3/5/33359/

Produced by StevenGibbs, Asad Razzaki and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
