The Project Gutenberg EBook of A report of Major Hart's case, of
rice-frauds, near Seringapatam, by W. H. Inglis

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A report of Major Hart's case, of rice-frauds, near Seringapatam

Author: W. H. Inglis

Release Date: August 26, 2010 [EBook #33536]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAJOR HART'S CASE OF RICE-FRAUDS ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)









                                   A
                                 REPORT
                                   OF
                           MAJOR HART'S CASE,
                                   OF
                              Rice-Frauds,
                                  NEAR
                             SERINGAPATAM,
                             _WITH NOTES_;
                                  AND
                              AN APPENDIX,
                               ADDRESSED
                TO THE PROPRIETORS OF EAST-INDIA STOCK.

                                   BY
                              W. H. INGLIS,

     AUTHOR OF THE ONLY REPORT NOT ANONYMOUS, OF MR. SHERSON's CASE
               AND TRIAL AT MADRAS, ALSO FOR RICE-FRAUDS.


                                LONDON:
              PUBLISHED BY J. M. RICHARDSON, 23, CORNHILL,
                    OPPOSITE THE ROYAL EXCHANGE; AND
                        J. HATCHARD, PICCADILLY.

                                 1818.



                MARCHANT, Printer, Ingram-Court, London.




                                   A
                                REPORT,
                               _&c. &c._


Were any apology necessary for this Report, a sufficient one would be
where Major Hart says, "When I add that Major-general Macaulay was my
junior officer; that, in consequence of my dismission, he succeeded
to the very regiment which, at this hour, I should have otherwise
commanded, and became a general officer so much sooner by my dismission;
I am satisfied that the Honourable Court (of Directors) will think his
conduct a _most material_ feature in the future consideration of my
case."--India-House-Papers, p. 362.

Another instance of Major Hart's sinister attack is, where Major-general
Macaulay has replied to it, saying, "There remains a farther slanderous
insinuation of Major Hart's, that I think myself bound to notice. He has
charged upon me, as a leading motive in the censure of his conduct, a
settled design of placing myself in the command of the fortress of
Palamcottah, and of the forces in the field in Tinnevelly, to his
exclusion! This strange charge he more than once gave distinct hints of
to myself. But he made it directly in the course of his last visit to
me, in June 1815, when he behaved so coarsely. It will, I have little
doubt, seem somewhat strange, even to your Lordship, (Harris, the
commander-in-chief,) but so it is, that to this hour I do not know to
whom I owe that command. _I not only never made application directly or
indirectly for it, but the idea of applying for it never once entered my
mind._--Papers, p. 388.

But Major-general Macaulay scarce needed this reply, since it is Major
Hart himself who can affirm his own error. The Major says, "I shall not
however pretend to defend the act _acknowledged_ of my having carried to
the field a quantity of private grain.[A] No, my Lord, (Harris,) most
deeply and sensibly do I feel and deplore the _error_ of my
conduct.--Papers, p. 352.

    [A] It will be maintained in the body of this Report, that Major
    Hart did never carry to the field a quantity of private grain.

And yet, notwithstanding this _pretended_ acknowledgment of _real_
error, it is the Board of Controul which, in order to allow Major Hart
to hold private grain, must set aside the very regulation upon this
subject. The 39th Regulation says, "it being the principle of the
present system, by liberal and avowed allowances, to place this
department upon so respectable a footing as to leave no temptation to
seek for unauthorized advantages, the Commissary of Grain is not on any
account, directly or indirectly, to derive any other advantage or
emolument from this situation than the _salary_ fixed by Government. The
strictest economy is, therefore, to be observed in every expense
attending this department; and the disbursements and accounts of the
Commissary are to be attested on honour, as prescribed in the forms
annexed to these Regulations.--Papers, p. 17.

And the mighty Board of Controul, besides allowing Major Hart to hold
private grain, and therefore to reap the attendant profit on it _with
perfect security_, next considers this both as _another question_ and as
_not another question_. Thus the Board having said "whether he (Major
Hart) ought to have derived any profit upon the original price of the
rice, so in his possession, is another question," can yet add, "but
_suppose he ought not_, when he[B] openly supplied it to our army,
and was contented with much less (profit) than he might have obtained
with perfect security, we cannot think it a crime of the blackest
die.--Papers, p. 232.

    [B] See in page 11, and query he or Captain Macleod; also
    whether openly or covertly supplied, &c.

The Board continues "this, and the circumstance of his silence, from the
16th to the 22d of April, appear to us the only points of doubt in the
whole case, and a conduct doubtful only on two such points does not, in
our contemplation, warrant the sentence[C] that has been passed upon it,
with the consequences to his fortune and honour to which it has led."
Papers, p. 232.

    [C] The propriety of Major Hart's dismission, after suspension
    from the Company's service, is, perhaps, self-evident, and might
    have been a ground of thanks; but who would have thanked the
    Court of Directors for being now made to deem correct, what
    formerly they were pleased to deem incorrect, viz. an Act of
    Parliament, and the one cited on what are called the Mandamus
    Papers!

But, "in our contemplation" of this "whole case," there are yet to be
noticed other two grand points of doubt. And first, as Lord Harris
writes, "it was not the loss of rice in the department of the Commissary
of Grain _alone_ that so seriously affected the general store of
provision for the army, but," again, secondly, "that infinitely more
extensive and entirely unexpected deficiency which was discovered, on
the 16th of April, in the quantity carried by bullocks, hired in the
Ceded Districts, under the authority of Lieutenant-Colonel Read, and of
which Captain Macleod was in the general superintendance."

Lord Harris explains, saying "Captain Macleod, to whom no report of
material loss had been made by the carriers on the 3d of April, had, on
the 5th, given me a report, of which a copy is enclosed, by which it
appeared that rice, the property of government, sufficient for the
consumption of 30,000 men, at half a seer per day, for six-and-thirty
days, was then in camp, independently of nearly an equal quantity
reported by the benjarries (bullock-owners) to be in their possession,
and which they had been ordered to retain for the public service. No
issues had been authorized from this stock, and the belief that it
existed prevented my feeling any uneasiness on the subject of
provisions, although I knew the amount in _Major Hart's_ charge was
nearly expended. The measurement of the rice on the 15th of April, in
the course of delivery (not by, observe, because) to Major Hart,
produced the FIRST suspicion of this enormous deficiency, and the
report of it, when ascertained the succeeding day, the consequent
alarm." Papers, p. 75.

Nor is Lord Harris here alluding towards the whole, but rather to the
close of Captain Macleod's Report, where it is stated that "the private
and public rice would feed 30,000 men for thirty-three (or, as Lord
Harris says, thirty-six) days, exclusive of Major Hart's department. It
is supposed Major Hart has 7000 bullock-loads, which would be ten seers
each to 30,000 men. (Signed) William Macleod, Superintendant of
Supplies." Papers, p. 82.

From these several extracts we have now to gather, that if, on the 5th
of April, Major Hart had ten seers each man, equal to ten days rice, at
whole allowance, on the 15th he would have no bullock-loads, whatever,
remaining "in his possession." Wherefore, from the 16th of April to the
6th of May, (see in page. 17,) and, further, from this last date to the
18th following, (see in page 18), the fraud on the rice, "then in
camp," must have been, not only "exclusive of Major Hart's department,"
but in that of Captain Macleod, from whose stock "no issues had been
authorized." We have now to observe, that the real question becomes, not
whether Major Hart could hold private as well as public grain? but,
whether this could be done by Captain Macleod, and by him after his
having returned in his report both classes of grain as "the property of
government?" And we presume, once for all, on this nice point, that
there will not be urged the existence of one sort of regulation for a
Commissary of _Provisions_, as Captain Macleod is sometimes called, and
another for a Commissiary of _Grain_, as Major Hart is always called.

Contending that he ordered his private grain from Madras, less for
the army than for his private followers of it, Major Hart would rest
his order upon the affidavit of one of those followers, by name
Sadashevah Moodiliar. But this dubash, or confidential servant, will
herein-afterwards be shown, among other of Major Hart's head people,
as tampering with Subidar Enom Beg, during the intervals of this native
soldier's examination by the Committee of Inquiry.

To proceed more particularly with Captain Macleod.--It was he who,
having first disclosed to Major-General Macaulay, (the private instead
of public secretary to Lord Harris,) that Major Hart had a quantity of
private grain to dispose of, and who, next observing the surprise with
which his communication was received, does, third, and finally, request
Major-General Macaulay's "permission to inform Major Hart that he (Major
Hart) must, _in future_, communicate directly with me (Major-General
Macaulay) upon the subject." Major-General Macaulay subjoins, "to this I
assented;" but elsewhere explains, that "with the exception of the
conversation that took place with Captain Macleod, when he delivered the
original message, I held no communication with Major Hart, but _by
letter_." Papers, pp. 159 and 158.

Relative, indeed, to Captain Macleod the Major-General thinks it
equally right to explain, saying "Captain (now Colonel Macleod) well
knows my sentiments of his character. Long as he has been in England, it
has not happened to me _once to meet him_. But I retain my former
respect for his integrity." Papers, p. 369.

It was Captain Macleod who, having said "by this observation (_a slight
of hand_ in receiving and issuing grain by measure), I do not mean _to
attempt_ to screen the bullock-contractors;" and added, "who, I am
persuaded, _in my own mind_, must have embezzled the greatest proportion
of the quantity deficient;" yet does shortly afterwards release from
arrest, at the sole desire of the bullock-contractors, of all other men,
not indeed a _bullock_, but yet its tantamount, a _flock_ contractor,
notwithstanding this, "one of the duffadars, Narnapah by name, was
detected in having _concealed_ seventy bags of rice in the bazar of the
Nizam's camp, for the purpose of being sold there;" and, for all that,
such seventy bags "were, on _discovery_, removed from the Nizam's bazar
to the grain depot, near head-quarters." Papers, p. 79.

It was once more Captain Macleod, who having said, "I impute the
deficiencies, generally, to the corruption of Sechiram," yet does not
confine or arrest this "security for all the contractors,[D] because his
holding a jaghire from government, in the Baramahl was _supposed to be_
a sufficient hold upon him," or hold, "which would put it _out of his
power to elude_ any punishment or penalty that might afterwards be
adjudged for his deception." Papers, p. 77.

    [D] "Except those of Selum, who appear, by the accompanying
    statement (part of Captain Macleod's often-mentioned Report,) to
    have lost or embezzled the _smallest_ proportion."

And such is the mode of reasoning subscribed to, rather than implicitly
believed in, by Lord Harris, where his Lordship says, "of Captain
Macleod's merits I have already had occasion to speak in terms of the
highest praise,[E] and although placed at the head of those persons from
whose misconduct the most serious mischief might have proceeded, and
which did actually produce considerable inconvenience to the army, I
hold it incumbent on me to declare that Captain Macleod is, _in no
degree_, blamable for this unfortunate business," or business, "which
_no means in his power to elude_ could possibly prevent." Papers, p. 75.

    [E] It will be seen, in page 12, where Major-General Macaulay
    has similarly written: "But I retain my former respect for his
    integrity."

We have said,--subscribed to, rather than implicitly believed
in,--because Lord Harris pursues "the principal carriers and benjarries
are now in the Baramahl, (the very place, observe, of Sechiram's
jaghire,) and I recommend to the immediate attention of government such
measures as it may appear proper to adopt for recovering from them the
amount of rice embezzled, and punishing those chiefs of this class of
men who stood forward in responsibility, and who certainly knew and
connived at the disposal of the rice, _if they were not themselves the
managers of the transaction_."

We now trust to have amply shown why Lord Harris thought, 1st, that "it
was not the loss of rice in the department of the Commissary of Grain
alone, that so seriously affected the general store of provision for
the army;[F] but, 2dly, that infinitely more extensive and entirely
unexpected deficiency, which was discovered in the quantity carried
by bullocks, hired in the Ceded Districts, under the authority of
Lieutenant-Colonel Read, and of which _Captain Macleod_ was in the
general superintendance.

    [F] In the debate on the Mandamus Papers, a proprietor of stock
    asks, "What did Lord Ellenborough say? Did he say, that what was
    done was conclusive evidence of any bargain having been made, or
    any price being charged? No; Lord Ellenborough said,--No; he is
    ordered to enter it as an item of account; but that does not
    give it the character of having been purchased for the public.
    He acquiesces in the direction to enter it; but it ought to be
    considered as if he had not so entered and as if it stood in its
    original situation." But we must ask, what would Lord
    Ellenborough have said, had his lordship been informed that the
    fraud was not solely in Major Hart's grain, but, also, in that
    of Captain Macleod, and who, _previously to the discovery of the
    fraud_, had been ordered, by Lord Harris, to enter, that is, to
    retain his benjarries, now called, private grain, for "the
    _public_ service." Of Major Hart's grain, it can equally be
    observed, that this had also been publicly returned in Captain
    Macleod's Report, which Report has been stated to close thus:
    "_it is supposed_ Major Hart has 7000 bullock-loads, which would
    be ten seers each to 30,000 men. (Signed) William Macleod,
    Superintendant of Supplies."

Upon this second and last of our own two points of grand doubt, we shall
offer some further extracts, by which it will be perceived that Major
Hart's head people were ordered back to the Ceded Districts, in company
with Captain Macleod's benjarries, that is, were ordered back to those
Districts, not before, but immediately upon the discovery of the fraud,
and, as it were, in consequence of it.

Asked by the Committee of Inquiry, "under whose charge was your rice
brought forward on the march, and placed at the ground of encampment?"
Major Hart replies, "under head people employed by myself, whom I
discharged and (though discharged, yet) sent to the Carnatic with
_General Floyd's_ detachment." In like manner, Captain Macleod states,
in one of his letters to government, that "Sechiram joined the army at
Kellamungulum and remained with it till the march of _General Floyd's_
division towards Caveriporam, when all the public and benjarries cattle,
which had at that time survived the campaign, were sent from the army."
Papers, p. 77. And under date of 18th April, Lord Harris having
confirmed that "_Major-General Floyd_, with all the cavalry and three
battalions of Native Infantry, marches to-morrow morning towards
Caveriporam to meet Colonel Read, and escort his benjarries to camp,"
explains that "their arrival is of the utmost consequence, as, on
measuring our bags to ascertain the rice they really contained, they
were found so much diminished, by loss or fraud, that eighteen days
provisions for the fighting men, at half allowance, is all that remains
in camp; our supplies must, therefore, arrive before the 6th of May, to
save us from extreme distress." Papers, p. 49.

Further beyond this coincidence, Captain Macleod's second of two
reports, dated Seringapatam, 29th June, 1799, says, "N.B. The 9025
mercals of rice remained in charge of Captain Macleod till Seringapatam
was taken; no part of it was issued before the 18th May. E.E. (Signed)
William Macleod, _late_ Superintendant of Supplies." Notwithstanding,
then, the extreme distress of the army, as just mentioned by Lord
Harris, we here find Captain Macleod admitting that he was a holder of
three days grain for 30,000 men, at whole allowance, not before but
after the 18th of May. Our inference is, what others have frequently
drawn in this case, that there was always a plenty rather than ever any
scarcity of grain.[G]

    [G] N.B. One mercal is twelve seers.

Finally, we are to produce Major Hart's dubash, the already mentioned
Sadashevah Moodiliar, as tampering among other of Major Hart's head
people, with Subidar Enom Beg, during the intervals of this native
soldier's examination by the Committee of Inquiry.

The Committee says, "from the very exact concurrence observed throughout
the depositions of the maistries (carriers) and head owners, (of
bullocks,) already examined, it appears that a further examination
of persons of those descriptions will not tend to afford any new
information on the subject under investigation; but as the native
commissioned and non-commissioned officers of the details which were
employed with the grain-department may, from their observation of the
conduct of the maistries and bullock-owners during the service, be able
to speak particularly to points connected therewith, the Committee call
upon Subidar Enom Beg, of the first battalion of the 12th regiment of
native infantry." Papers, p. 53.

And having first disproved, in common with other guards during the
march, the alleged irruptions of the enemy's horse, as counterpleaded
by the benjarries, even in phalanx form, Subidar Enom Beg, "of his own
accord," next informs the Committee, that, "about eleven o'clock in the
forenoon of yesterday, the _head conicopoly_ of the grain-department, by
name Dunnacody, accompanied by a tindall of lascars attached to the
department, came to his tent and told him that he had been directed by
MAJOR HART to inquire of him the names of the subidars and jemidars,
also the number of havildars, naigues, and sepoys, which had been
employed with the rice-department; that he (the subidar) told the
conicopoly that two of the companies were in Seringapatam, and that the
company from Major Tolfrey's battalion, in camp, consisted of such a
number of havildars, naigues, and sepoys, together with his own name,
and that of the jemidar, all of which the conicopoly took down, in
writing, and then went away. That in about half an hour afterwards
the conicopoly and tindall returned, and asked the subidar to come
to Tumboo Naik, _one of the principal bullock-owners_ and a DUBASH,
whom he supposed to be Major Hart's (Sadashevah Moodiliar, the
affidavit-witness,) as they wished to speak to him, and to come without
dressing himself. The subidar answered, 'that as he might be wanted for
duty, he could not come without his commanding-officer's leave,' to
which the conicopoly replied, 'that, as he would probably be sent for by
the Committee sitting near the general's tent, he desired him to keep
favour upon him,' and the subidar answered, 'he was in the Company's
service and, if sent for, he should tell what he saw, and could not tell
any lies.' That the subidar was then sent for by Major Tolfrey, and
ordered to come to the Committee, which he did, and that having attended
the Committee and been ordered by Colonel Muat (the President) to come
again this morning, he was going to his lines when _one of the
maistries_ meeting him upon the road, asked, 'what news at the
Committee?' The subidar answered him, 'you have no right to inquire: I
have been to the Committee on business which does not concern you; go
about your business.'" Papers, pp. 55 and 56.

We would observe upon this testimony of Enom Beg, that the
affidavit-dubash of Major Hart, Sadashevah Moodiliar, who is wont to
describe himself as "a writer in charge of the public servants in the
grain-department," is not, in our opinion, so important a personage as
Major Hart's head conicopoly Dunnacody, and this because the employment
of a head conicopoly is much more _official_ than that of a dubash,
however greatly any particular occasion, like the present, for instance,
may render the latter's services desirable. But in India it would
otherwise appear that the dubash is accounted by far the more important
personage of the two, at least if we can judge from Mr. Sherson's trial
at Madras, also for rice-frauds; for, on this trial Sir John Newbolt, as
third of three Judges, was pleased to argue, saying, 'Audy Narrain, (the
dubash of Mr. Sherson,) one of the persons offering the bribe, which is
_almost tantamount_ to naming Mr. Sherson himself.' Even in this case of
Major Hart there is what is not wholly dissimilar to bribery; namely,
where the conicopoly replies, 'that as he (Enom Beg) would probably be
sent for by the Committee sitting near the general's tent, he (the
conicopoly) desired him to keep favour on him.' The frequent occurrence
among native Indians of the word _lies_ is to be here regarded as an
Anglo-Orientalism. It is to the probability of Enom Beg and his
fellow-soldiers' testimonies over those of Major Hart and Captain
Macleod's head people, that attention shall safely be paid.

Relative to the benjarries and maistries of Captain Macleod, as well as
to Major Hart's head people, we must differ from the Committee of
Inquiry, where saying that "a _further_ examination of persons of those
descriptions will not tend to afford any new information on the
subject." Our cause of difference is, that neither Sadashevah and
Dunnacody, nor Sechiram and Narnapah, were _ever_ examined by this
Committee.

Major-General Macaulay "cannot conceive, under the strong case which
appears to be made out, how the government of this country and
Parliament can, _with a due regard to character_, abstain from a
revision of the whole question." Neither can we conceive how, in this
respect,--not the government (of the Board of Controul and Court of
Directors,) but--Parliament abstains.




                               APPENDIX.

               _To the Proprietors of East-India Stock._


Major Hart, in his advertisement, (_Times_, 24th of April,) says "I
fear that I shall have no alternative but to appeal against such daily
slander to the laws of my country." In other words, he, who sought to
fight a duel with Major-Gen. Macaulay, fears. And may he fear!

But Major Hart dares not appeal to the laws of his country, were he even
slandered after the _daily_ manner of his own advertisement. Major Hart
is too old a soldier to have to learn, that

  He who fights and runs away,
  Lives to fight another day.

Nor can Major Hart forget where Major-General Macaulay states,
"Report--to which, however, I can scarce give credit--assigns this
disgraceful production to the pen of a noted Barrister. Be that as it
may, Major Hart stands fully (be this as it may, equally fully)
responsible." Major-General Macaulay's _official_ statement is, "Major
Hart addressed a letter to the Court of Directors, dated the 22d of last
month: that libellous letter has not yet been printed, by order of the
Court of Directors, for the use of the Proprietors; but Major Hart has
thought fit to print and widely to send it into circulation. I am sorry
that it is not inserted in the Papers respecting the _Mandamus_; the
reason may be, that the Court of Directors, possibly viewing it in the
light I do, could not have thought it proper to make themselves
accessaries to the circulation of a defamatory document, unaccompanied
by explanations from me. To that letter from Major Hart is appended a
declaration, under the signature of three General Officers; Gen. Sir
John Floyd (Bart. omitted), Lieut.-Gen. Brown, and Lieut.-Gen. Bridges,
on what these officers are pleased to term _some important points
connected with_ Major Hart's case. The words in Italics are so printed
in the original."

Proprietors!--Have you never heard of a "Review of _some important
passages_ in the Administration of Sir George Barlow, Bart. by Charles
Marsh, Esq. M.P.?" have you never heard that this "noted Barrister" is
the probable author of an anonymous Report of Mr. Sherson's case, if not
of his trial itself, or will you not hear your own Directors?

"The two following Papers, _although private_, having already appeared
in print, are here (the Records of the Company) inserted for the
information of the Proprietors; but it _does not_ appear from (here) the
Records of the Company, that they were ever (during 16 long years)
_officially_ communicated to the Court of Directors." The two Papers
are, "A Letter from the Right Hon. Henry Dundas to David Scott, Esq."
a deceased Director; and an enclosure in the foregoing, signed "William
Dundas," and "T. Wallace;" which last paper has actually been called
by some _A Report of the Board of Controul_. On the other hand, the
deceased Mr. David Scott's authority to correspond and correspondence do
not appear.

So, in Mr. Sherson's case, there has been published an unsigned or
anonymous Report of it, by a Mr. Halhed, one of the clerks in the
India-House, whose error "was not his first" of the kind, yet whose
Report was ordered, it has confidently been asserted, by only some one
or two of the whole Court of Directors. In Mr. Sherson's case again the
Board of Controul has compelled the erasure, from a despatch of the
Court of Directors, of a paragraph recommendatory of an investigation
into the conduct (on this Mr. Sherson's trial) of no less a person than
Sir Francis Macnaghten, the _second_ of three Judges, of whom the
_third_ is almost as much concerned as Sir Francis himself.

Nor let these parallels be thought to beg the question, since they might
readily have been extended; and since Major Hart's case would prove
itself in Courts of Law, whether by artful confessions, or by other and
better description of testimony. Unhappily, however, the period for this
is expired.

                                                           W. H. INGLIS.
  3, Mincing-lane.



                                THE END.



                           MARCHANT, Printer,
                    Ingram-Court, Fenchurch-Street.




    TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE: Footnotes have been moved from the middle
    of the text to the end of the paragraph referring to those
    footnotes. Apart from that, no other changes have been made
    for this e-text version.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A report of Major Hart's case, of
rice-frauds, near Seringapatam, by W. H. Inglis

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAJOR HART'S CASE OF RICE-FRAUDS ***

***** This file should be named 33536.txt or 33536.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/5/3/33536/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
