The Project Gutenberg EBook of Acanthus and Wild Grape, by F. O. Call

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Acanthus and Wild Grape

Author: F. O. Call

Release Date: August 27, 2010 [EBook #33552]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ACANTHUS AND WILD GRAPE ***




Produced by Al Haines









Acanthus and Wild Grape


By

F. O. Call

Author of "In a Belgian Garden"




McCLELLAND & STEWART

Publishers -- Toronto




COPYRIGHT, CANADA, 1920

BY MCCLELLAND & STEWART, LIMITED, TORONTO




NOTE: Many of these poems were first published in Canadian Magazines,
and the Author wishes to thank the publishers of the _University
Magazine_, the _Canadian Magazine_, the _Westminster_, the _Canadian
Bookman_, _Canada West_, and the _Mitre_ for permission to reprint.




CONTENTS

ACANTHUS


  Foreword
  Acanthus
  The Old Gods
  The Obelisk
  Gray Birds
  After Tea
  Through a Long Cloister
  Cathedral Vespers
  The Lotus-Worshippers
  The Broken Mast
  The Lace-maker of Burges
  Rheims
  Calvary
  Gone West
  Peace
  Hidden Treasure
  A River Sunset
  The Madonna
  An Idol in a Shop Window
  In a Forest
  The Golden Bowl
  On a Swiss Mountain
  The Nun's Garden
  You Went Away in Summertime
  To a Modern Poet
  The Mystic
  Ad Episcopi Collegium
  A Song of the Homeland
  The Mirror
  I Made a Little Song
  Birds
  The Bluebird's Wing
  The Answer


WILD GRAPE

  Wild Grape
  To a Greek Statue
  Omnipresence
  My Cathedral
  The Foundry
  Swiss Sketches--
      (I)  After Sunset on Jura
     (II)  Lucerne
    (III)  Lake Leman
  Visions--
    I, II, III, IV
  Japanese Prints--
      (I)  The Lady with the Yellow Fan
     (II)  Caged Birds
    (III)  Wisteria
  A Venetian Palace
  Japanese Iris
  Japanese Love-Songs
  Cups of Jade
  The Loon's Cry
  Prayer




FOREWORD

Poetry has been defined as "Thought touched by Emotion," and I know no
better working definition, although no doubt more scientific and
accurate ones could be found.  The best poets of all ages seem to have
had this ideal plainly before them, whether consciously or
unconsciously, and I cannot see how modern poets can dispense with
either thought or emotion if they are to write real poetry.  For one is
not enough without the other.  Take for example the first lines of
Master's "Spoon River Anthology."

  "Where are Elmer, Herman, Bert, Tom and Charley,
  The weak of will, the strong of arm, the clown, the boozer,
      the fighter?
  All, all, are sleeping on the hill,
  One passed in a fever,
  One was buried in a mine,
  One was killed in a brawl,
  One died in a jail,
  One fell from a bridge toiling for children and wife,
  All, all are sleeping on the hill."


This sounds tragic indeed, but seems to have aroused no emotion on the
part of the poet and excites none in his readers.  In fact, through the
whole poem, emotion is held in check with a strong hand, and only
allowed to show itself in some distorted cynicism.

Let us take an example of the opposite extreme where emotion, whether
real or fancied, has stifled thought.

  O World!  O Men!  O Sun! to you I cry,
    I raise my song defiant, proud, victorious,
  And send this clarion ringing down the sky:
    "I love, I love, I love, and Love is glorious!"


The definition chosen need not hamper the most "modern" poet nor
restrict his choice of subject, for there are few things that cannot
awaken both thought and emotion if looked at in the right way.  An iron
foundry and a Venetian palace have immense possibilities of arousing
both elements, and perhaps the foundry has the greater power.

The modern poet has joined the great army of seekers after freedom,
that is, he refuses to observe the old conventions in regard to his
subjects and his method of treating them.  He refuses to be bound by
the old restrictions of rhyme and metre, and goes far afield in search
of material on which to work.  The boldest of the new school would
throw overboard all the old forms and write only in free verse, rythmic
prose or whatever he may wish to call it.  The conservative, on the
other hand, clings stubbornly to the old conventions, and will have
nothing to do with vers libre or anything that savours of it.

But vers libre, like the motor-car and aeroplane, has come to stay
whether we like it or no.  It is not really a new thing, although put
to a new use, for some of the greatest poetry of the Hebrews and other
Oriental nations was written in a form of free verse.  At the present
time the number of those using it as medium of expression is steadily
increasing.  In France, Italy, the United States, and even in
conservative England, the increase in the number of poems recently
published in this form has been remarkable.  The modernists hail this
tendency as the dawn of a new era of freedom, while the conservatives
see poetry falling into decadence and ruin.  The right view of the case
probably lies, as it generally does, between the extremes.  There is
much beauty to be found in walking in beaten paths or rambling in
fenced-in fields and woods, but perhaps one who sails the skies in an
aeroplane may see visions and feel emotions that never come to those
who wander on foot along the old paths of the woods and fields below.

But it seems to me that it matters little in what form a poem is cast
so long as the form suits the subject, and does not hinder the freedom
of the poet's thought and emotion.  And I am old-fashioned enough to
expect that beauty will be revealed as well.  Out of this union of
thought, emotion and beauty, we could scarcely fail to get strength
also, which term many modern poets use to cover an ugliness that is
often nothing but disguised weakness.  But form alone will not make
even a semblance of poetry as the following lines, unimpeachable in
form, from Sir Walter Scott plainly show:

  "Then filled with pity and remorse,
  He sorrowed o'er the expiring horse."


Nor can I conceive of more beautiful poetry than the following, by
Richard Aldington, although rhyme and regular metre are absent:

  "And we turn from the music of old,
  And the hills that we loved and the meads,
  And we turn from the fiery day,
  And the lips that were over-sweet;
  For silently
  Brushing the fields with red-shod feet,
  With purple robe
  Searing the grass as with a sudden flame,
  Death,
  Thou hast come upon us."


And this brings me to the real purpose of this Foreword--the
explanation of the title of this book.  On the hills and plains of
Southern Europe there grows a plant with beautiful indented leaves--the
Acanthus.  The Greek artist saw the beauty of these leaves, and, having
arranged and conventionalized them, carved them upon the capitals of
the columns which supported the roofs and pediments of his temples and
public buildings.  Since that time, wherever pillars are used in
architecture, one does not have far to look to find acanthus leaves
carved upon them.  In the Roman Forum, in Byzantine churches like Saint
Sophia or Saint Mark's, in the Mediaeval Cathedrals of France.  England
and Spain, in the Renaissance buildings scattered throughout the world,
and even in the most modern office-buildings of our great cities, this
decoration of acanthus is to be found.  And the reason is not far to
seek.

  "A thing of beauty ... will never
  Pass into nothingness."


I recently saw a picture of a Corinthian column of a ruined Greek
temple standing against the sky, and broken fragments of its fellows
lying at its foot, with wild vines climbing over them.  And who could
say that one was more beautiful than the other?  The carved acanthus
leaves upon the column were beautiful because of their symmetry,
harmony of light and shade and clear-cut outline, but the wild grape
was perhaps more beautiful still in its natural freedom.

So in this little book will be found some poems in the old conventional
forms and some others in free rhythms, in which the author has tried in
a humble way, to mingle elements of thought, emotion and beauty.

F.O.C.

BISHOP'S COLLEGE
  LENNOXVILLE, QUE.




ACANTHUS



  ACANTHUS

  Beneath the sculptured marble portico
    Of a Greek temple, white against the sky,
    Carved capitals on pillars rising high
  Gleam like great blossoms in the noonday's glow.
  Proudly each column in the stately row
    Its crown of beauty wears; the sunbeams die
    Among acanthus leaves that nestling lie
  Where they were carved two thousand years ago.

  Eternal Beauty, thou wilt not be bound
    By time-forged fetters, but dost find a home
  Where Gothic pillars rise acanthus-crowned
    Beneath gray northern spires or southern dome,
  Eternal Beauty, Everlasting Truth,
  Thou hast the secret of undying youth.




  THE OLD GODS

  Old  gods are dead; their broken shrines are lying
  Profaned with blood and trampled to the ground;
  I see lost beauty with each sunset dying,
  I hear lost music in each echoing sound.
  Old gods are dead; triumphant stands the scoffer
  Beside old altars where our offerings lay,--
  False gods perhaps,--but what have you to offer
  Who batter down old temples in a day?
  Old gods are dead; but still the sunset lingers,
  The moonlight still its store of treasure yields,
  Dawn touches darkness with its magic fingers,
  And bluebirds wing their flight across green fields,
    The sea-tides ebb and flow, stars shine above,
    And human hearts still long for human love.




  THE OBELISK

  (_Place de la Concorde, Paris_)

  There rise the palace walls as fair to-day,
    As when with arms and banners gleaming bright,
    The pageantry of royal pomp and might
  Passed through the guarded gates and went its way.
  The blue, translucent beams of morning play
    On arch triumphal, veiled in silver light;
    And here, where blind red fury reached its height,
  An ancient column rises grim and gray.

  Slumbering in mystic sleep it seems to be,
    And dreaming dreams of Egypt long ago,
    Unmindful of the ceaseless ebb and flow
  About its feet of life's unresting sea;
    But 'mid the roar, I hear it murmur low:
  Poor fools, they know not all is vanity!




  GRAY BIRDS

  Gray birds of passage from another sky
    Are those long hours I sit and wait for you;
    Borne by strong wings across the sunlit blue
  They go--dark flecks of shadow drifting by.
  Sometimes they bring a song--a joyful cry,
    As morn and eve your coming used to do;
    But sometimes plaintive notes of sorrow too,
  Amid the joyful echoes wail and die.

  Then as I watch the beating of the wings
    That seek a haven by far northern lakes,
  And catch the note of some bird-heart that sings,
    Or hear the plaintive cry of one that breaks,
  I turn once more to half-forgotten things,
    And the old longing in my heart awakes.




  AFTER TEA

  See how the aged trembling hands of Day
  Spill over the white cloth and tea-cups blue,
  Red wine from his last goblet poured away;
  So let me by the window sit with you,
  And watch the sun drop down behind the trees,
  Or gleam across the snow--a crimson bar;
  For in still, mystic moments such as these
  Down unknown by-ways we may wander far.
  The crimson turns to purple on the snow,
  The orange sky grown gray, and glimmering lights
  Of scattered star-lamps through the darkness glow;
  But neither Night nor Death my soul affrights,
    For clear there gleams, all earthly dark above,
    The ever-burning star-lamp of your love.




  THROUGH A LONG CLOISTER

  Through a long cloister where the gloom of night
    Lingers in sombre silence all the day,
    Across worn pavements crumbling to decay
  We wandered, blindly groping for the light.
  A door swung wide, and splendour infinite
    Streamed through the painted glass, and drove away
    The lingering gloom from choir, nave and bay,
  And a great minster's glory met our sight.

  Blindly along life's cloister do we grope,
    We seek a gate that leads to life immortal,
      We see it loom before us dim and vast,
  And doubt's dark shadow's veil the light of hope:
    When lo, Death's hand flings wide the sombre portal,
      And light unfading meets our gaze at last.




  CATHEDRAL VESPERS

  The gloom of night creeps down the shadowy choir,
    But through the great rose-window's gorgeous bloom
    Red shafts of sunset fall upon a tomb,
  And makes the gray stone burn--a crimson pyre.
  The creeping tide of darkness rises higher,
    Tall ghostly pillars through the shadows loom,
    And from dim altars through the minster's gloom,
  Pale yellow gleams the guttering candles' fire.

  Sudden from out the shadow streams a song,
    --A sword of sound that cleaves the dark in twain--
  And rings and glows triumphant, swift and strong,
    Victorious over sorrow, death and pain;
  And golden visions pass before my soul
  As through dim arches the last echoes roll.




  THE LOTUS-WORSHIPPERS

  With silent feet in trailing robes of white
    They crept from shadowy temples, far beyond
    Tall bamboo groves, to seek the lotus-pond
  That gleamed like some dark jewel through the night
  Upon great Buddha's breast.  The crimson height
    Echoed their chanting as the morning dawned,
    And each bud, breaking from its silver bond,
  Lifted its cup to catch the golden light.

  And here beside this mist-bound northern lake,
    Encircled by tall spires of Gothic firs,
    The ancient beauty-worship wakes and stirs
  Within me, as I watch the morning break
    Upon white lily-buds, whose lips agleam
    Whisper the secret of the world-old dream.




  THE BROKEN MAST

  It lies alone upon a tide-swept shore,
    Above a crescent beach of silver sand,
    Flung high upon the rocks by some great hand
  Stretched from the dark, whose fingers clutched and tore
  The main-mast from the ship.  Above it soar
    White gulls, and near in wild-rose tangle stand
    Old twisted pines, where song-birds of the land
  Mingle soft singing with the ocean's roar.

  And through long summer days it dreams old dreams
    Of far-off southern forests, and the sighing
  Of wind-blown boughs above bird-haunted streams;
    But when the storm sets the white spindrift flying
  It thrills and trembles with the old unrest,
  And shakes the wild-rose petals from its breast.




  THE LACE-MAKER OF BRUGES

  Her age-worn hands upon her apron lie
    Idle and still.  Against the sunset glow
    Tall poplars stand, and silent barges go
  Along the green canal that wanders by.
  A lean, red finger pointing to the sky,
    The spire of Notre Dame.  Above a row
    Of dim, gray arches where the sunbeams die,
  The ancient belfry guards the square below.

  One August eve she stood in that same square
    And gazed and listened, proud beneath her tears,
      To see her soldier passing down the street.
  To-night the beat of drums and trumpets' blare
    With bursts of fiendish music smite her ears,
      And mingle with the tread of trampling feet.

  AUGUST, 1915.




  RHEIMS

  In royal splendour rose the house of prayer,
    Its mystic gloom arched over by the flight
    Of soaring vault; above the nave's dim night
  Rich gleamed the painted windows wondrous fair.
  Sweet chimes and chanting mingled in the air;
    Blue clouds of incense dimmed the vaulted height;
    And on the altar, like a beacon light,
  The gold cross glittered in the candles' glare.

  To-day no bells, no choirs, no incense cloud,
    For thou, O Rheims art prey of evil powers;
  But with a voice a thousand times more loud
    Than siege-guns echoing round thy shattered towers,
  Do thy mute bells to all the world proclaim
  Thy martyred glory and thy foeman's shame.

  JUNE, 1916.




  CALVARY

  The women stood and watched while thick, black night
    Enclosed the awful tragedy.  Afar
    Three crosses stood, against a single bar
  Of crimson-glowing, black-encircled light.
  No hint of Easter dawn.  In all the height
    Of that dark heaven, not a single star
    To whisper;--Love and Life the victors are.
  It seemed to them that wrong had conquered right.

  O ye who watch and wait, the night is long.
    A curtain of spun fire and woven gloom
      Across the mighty tragedy is drawn.
  But soon your ears shall hear a triumph song,
    And golden light shall touch each sacred tomb,
      And voices shout at last--The Dawn!  The Dawn.

  AUGUST, 1916.




  GONE WEST

_Dedicated to Lieutenant Rodolphe Lemieux, killed in action August 29,
1918._

  I do not think of them--our glorious dead--
    As laying tired heads upon the breast
    Of a kind mother to be lulled to rest;
  I do not see them in a narrow bed
  Of alien earth by their own blood dyed red,
    But see in their own simple phrase--Gone West--
    The words of knights upon a holy quest,
  Who saw the light and followed where it led.

  Gone West!  Scarred warrior hosts go marching by,
    Their longing faces turned to greet the light
  That glows and burns upon the western sky.
    Leaving behind the darkness of the night,
  The long day over and the battle won,
  They seek for rest beyond the setting sun.




  PEACE

  Now Peace at last is hovering o'er the world
    On silver wings, and golden trumpets blow.
    Home from the long crusade the warriors go,--
  Victorious knights with banners wide unfurled,
  Bow down your head, for these have passed where swirled
    Great tides of darkness ebbing too and fro;
    Their eyes have seen, 'mid fiery tempests' glow,
  How youth at Death its dauntless challenge hurled.

  And these are they who saw the Holy Grail,
    Brimming with youthful blood like ruddy wine
    Poured out in sacrifice.  The light divine
  Before whose awful glow they did not quail
    Now beckons us; and shall our footsteps fail
  To follow where they set the blood-stained sign?

  NOVEMBER, 1918.




  HIDDEN TREASURE

  O sun-browned boy with the wondering eyes,
  Do you see the blue of the summer skies?
  Do you hear the song of the drowsy stream,
  As it winds by the shore where the birches gleam?
  Then come, come away
  From the shadowy bay,
  And we'll drift with the stream where the rapids play;
  For we are two pirates, fierce and bold,
  And we'll capture the hoard of the morning's gold.

  A roving craft is our red canoe,
  O pirate chief with the eyes of blue;
  So hoist your flag with the skull on high,
  And out we'll sail where the treasures lie.
  For in days of old
  Came pirates bold,
  With a Spanish galleon's captured gold;
  And their boat was wrecked on the river strand,
  And its treasures strewn on the silver sand.

  Now steady all as we dash along,
  The rapids are swift but our paddles are strong;
  And soon we'll drift with the water's flow
  Where the treasure lies hid in the shallows below.
  O, cool and dim,
  'Neath its foam-flecked brim,
  Is the pool where the swallows dip and skim;
  So we'll plunge by the prow of our red canoe
  For the treasure that lies in the quivering blue.

  Now home once more to the shadowy bay,
  For we've captured the gold of the summer's day,
  And emeralds green from the banks along,
  And silver bars from the white-throat's song.
  No pirates bore
  Such a glittering store
  From the treasure ships of the days of yore,
  As the spoils we have won on the shining stream,
  While we drifted along in a golden dream.




  A RIVER SUNSET

  Red sunlight fades from wood and town,
    The western sky is crimson-dyed,
  Gaunt shadow-ships drift silent down
    Upon the river's gleaming tide.

  The hills' clear outlines melt away
    Or veil themselves in purple light,
  And burning thoughts that vexed the day
    Become fair visions of the night.




  THE MADONNA

  She shivered and crouched in the immigrant shed
    In the midst of the surging crowd;
  Her hands were warped with the years of toil,
    And her young form bent and bowed.

  Her eyes looked forth with a frightened glance
    At the throng that round her pressed;
  But her face was the face of the Mother of God
    As she looked at the babe on her breast.




  AN IDOL IN A SHOP WINDOW

  Old Lohan peers through the dusty glass,
    From a jumble of curios quaint and rare;
  And he watches the hurrying crowds that pass
    The whole day long, through the ancient square.

  Wrapped in his robe of gold and jade,
    Here by the window he patiently waits
  For the sound that the gongs and the conches made,
    In the days of old at the temple gates.

  He heaves no sighs and he sheds no tears,
    For his heart is bronze, and he does not know
  That his temple has been for a thousand years
    But a mound of dust where the bamboos grow.

  So here he sits through the nights and the days,
    And the sun goes up and down the sky;
  But he often looks with a wistful gaze
    At the crowds that always pass him by.

  And his eyes half closed in a mystic dream
    Of his poppy-land of long ago,
  Turn back to the shores of the sacred stream
    And the kneeling throng he used to know.

  But he sometimes smiles as he sees the crowd
    Of human folks that pass him by;
  Then he wraps himself in his mystic shroud,--
    And the sun once more goes down the sky.




  IN A FOREST

  Silver birch and dusky pine,
  Reaching up to find the light
  From the forest's gloomy night,
  From the thicket where entwine
  Stunted shrub and creeping vine,
  From the damp where witch-fire glows
  And the poison fungus grows,
  High you lift your heads, O trees,
  To the kisses of the breeze,
  To the far-off vaulted sky,
  To the clouds that pass you by,
  To the sun that shines on high.

  From the dusk of earthly night
  Strive, O soul, to reach the light.




  THE GOLDEN BOWL

_On seeing a picture of a boy gazing at a golden bowl which among
Eastern nations was a symbol of life._

  In a dream he seems to lie
    Gazing at the golden bowl,
  Where dim visions passing by
    Whisper vaguely to his soul.

  Restless phantoms come and go
    Crowned with cypress or with bay;
  Sad or merry, swift or slow,
    Tread they down the winding way.

  Still the pageant winds along,--
    Youth and age and love and lust,
  Till at last the motley throng
    Fades and crumbles into dust.

  All in vain upon the bowl
    Gaze the wondering, boyish eyes;
  He shall read its hidden scroll
    Only when it shattered lies.

  For a wondrous light shall gleam
    From the scattered fragments born.
  Boy, dream on, for life's a dream,
    Followed by a golden morn.




  ON A SWISS MOUNTAIN

  Lad, the mighty hills are calling,
    Hills of promise gleaming bright,
  And the floods of sunshine falling
    Fill their deepest vales with light.

  There the young dawn's golden fire
    Beckons to a brighter day,
  Untrod paths of youth's desire,
    Heights unconquered far away.

  Steep and dark and spectre-haunted
    Winds the pathway to the height;
  Sturdy youth with heart undaunted
    Deems the toiling short and light.

  Short or long, an easy Master,
    Gives each tired toiler rest,
  Counts not failure or disaster
    If the striving be the best.

  Go lad, go, 'tis Life that calls you,
    Mates of old must soothe their pain,
  Mindless of whate'er befalls you
    If but honour still remain.




  THE NUN'S GARDEN

  They have made me a lovely garden
    With walls that are rugged and gray;
  They have filled it with pinks and roses
    And lilies that bloom but a day;
  But the walls are so high and frowning,
    And the paths are so smooth and straight,
  And even their smallest winding
    Leads straight to the chapel gate.

  I have planted a bed of pansies
    Along by the chapel wall,
  But though I have watered and weeded
    They never have blossomed at all.
  The sunshine of God cannot fall there,
    For the chapel tower is too high;
  So under its cold, gray shadow
    My poor little blossoms die.

  The Mother of God--in marble--
    Gleams white where the willows toss,
  And at the far end of the pathway
    The dear Christ hangs on the cross;
  And when the vespers are over,
    If I have not sinned all day,
  I may walk to the end of the garden
    And kneel by the cross and pray.

  But oh, for the wild, wild garden
    That I knew in the days gone by,
  Where the birches and elms and maples
    Stretched up to the wind-swept sky;
  Where, murmuring silver music,
    The brook through the ferny dell
  Ran down to the fields of clover,--
    But hush, there's the vesper bell!




  YOU WENT AWAY IN SUMMERTIME

  You went away in summertime
    When leaves and flowers were young,
  And birds still lingered in the fields
    With many songs unsung.

  I'm glad it was in summertime
    When skies were clear and blue,
  I could not say good-bye to you
    And bear the winter too.




  TO A MODERN POET

  Why must you sing of sorrow
    When the world is so full of woe?
  Why must you sing of the ugly?
    For the ugly and sad I know.
  Why will you sing of railways,
    Of Iron and Steel and Coal,
  And the din of the smoky cities?
    For these will not feed my soul.

  But sing to me songs of beauty
    To gladden my tired eyes,--
  The beauty of waving forest,
    Of meadows and sunlit skies;
  Sing me of childish laughter,
    Of cradles and painted toys,
  Of the sea and the brooks and the rivers,
    And the shouting of bathing boys.

  For the earth has a store of beauty
    Deep hid from our blinded eyes,
  And only the true-born poet
    Knows just where the treasure lies.
  So lead me from paths that are ugly,
    From the dust of the city street.
  To paths that are fringed with flowers,
    Where the sky and the meadows meet.

  And though Sorrow may walk beside me
    To the far, far end of the road,
  If Beauty but beckon me onward,
    Less heavy will seem my load;
  And led in the paths of beauty,
    The world from its strife will cease;
  For I know that the paths of beauty
    Lead on to the paths of peace.




  THE MYSTIC

  The mystic sits by the sacred stream
    Watching the sun as it mounts the sky;
  And life to him is a haunting dream
    Or a motley pageant passing by.

  Sorrow and joy go on their way,
    Passion and lust and love and hate;
  Only a band of mummers they,
    Blindly led by the hand of fate.

  Though the pageant is real and himself the dream,
    Though men are born and strive and die,
  Yet the mystic sits by the sacred stream
    Watching the sun go down the sky.




  AD EPISCOPI COLLEGIUM

  Here in the beautiful valley, here where the fair rivers meeting,
    Mingle their waters in silence and wander afar to the sea,
  Now does thy son returning offer thee homage and greeting,
    Now do my wandering footsteps turn, O Mother, to thee.

  Gleam in the light of the sunset cross and turret and tower,
    Mirrored majestic and silent down by the willow-clad shore;
  Far through the valley resounding, telling the evensong hour,
    Echoes the old bell's tolling, calling me back once more.

  Here in the halls where I lingered, there in the woods where I wandered,
    On campus and river and hillside other young lives are aglow,
  Dreaming the dreams that I dreamed, thinking the thoughts that I pondered
    Deeming the pathway long and the swift-footed hours slow.

  Rejoice young hearts in your youth, morn is the time for gladness,
    Time to sow for a harvest which all too soon you must reap;
  Bright be the hour of your noontide with never a shadow of sadness,
    Golden the gleam of your evening with silence and rest and sleep.

    Glows the west crimson and gold far down the glorious river,
  Cross and tower and turret fade in the gloom of the night;
    Yet will my heart remember both Mother and sons forever,
  Far though the pathway may lead me, swift though the years
        in their flight.




  A SONG OF THE HOMELAND

  I'll sing you a song of the Homeland,
    Though the strains be of little worth,
  A song of our own loved Homeland,
    Of the noblest land upon earth;
  Where the tide of the sea from oceans three
    Beats high in its triple might,
  Where the winds are born in a southern morn
    And die in a polar night.

  I'll sing you a song of the Eastland,
    Of the land where our fathers died,
  Where Saxon and Frank, their feuds long dead,
    Are sleeping side by side;
  Where their sons still toil on the hard-won soil
    Of the mighty river plain,
  Where the censer swings and the Angelus rings,
    And the old faith lives again.

  I'll sing you a song of the Westland
    Where the magic cities rise,
  And the prairies clothed with their golden grain
    Stretch under the azure skies;
  Where the mountains grim in the clouds grow dim
    Far north in the arctic land,
  And the northern light in its mystic flight
    Flares over the golden strand.

  And I'll sing of the men of the Homeland
    From the north and east and west,
  The men who went to the Homeland's call,
    (Ah, God, we have given our best!)
  But not in vain are our heroes slain
    If under the darkened skies,
  All hand in hand from strand to strand
    A sin-purged nation rise.




  THE MIRROR

  Your mirror, love, reflects your smile
    As morn-flushed skies the coming dawn,
  But oh, how blank the weary while
    When you are gone!

  My life's a mirror; with you near
    'Tis filled with joy the live-long day,
  But oh, how meaningless and drear
    With you away!




  I MADE A LITTLE SONG

  I made a little song to-day,
  And then I wandered down Broadway,
  And saw the strange mad people run
  And dance about me in the sun,
  Or dive into the Underground
  Like rabbits frightened by the sound
  Of their own scampering through the grass;
  I watched a thousand people pass,
  But not a one did I hear say--
  I made a little song to-day.

  I made a little song to-day,
  It sang beside me all the way
  Until I reached the lower town,
  Where crowds went surging up and down.
  Their eyes were hard and faces white,
  But some of them looked glad and bright,
  Because the Bulls--or was it Bears?--
  Had brought them gold for worthless shares;
  But I was happier than they;--
  I made a little song to-day.




  BIRDS

  I lie beneath a dark green pine
  Where sunbeams scarcely ever shine,
  And if I'm still as still can be
  Shy forest birds come down to me.

  Brown thrushes run along the ground,
  Goldfinches flit without a sound,
  And humming-birds with ruby throats
  Alight to smooth their emerald coats.

  And when some day alone I lie
  Beneath the ever-changing sky,
  I'm glad to know the birds will come
  To welcome me to my new home.

  For I will lie so still that they
  Will linger by me all the day,
  And lulled at evening by their song
  I shall not find the darkness long.




  THE BLUEBIRD'S WING

  One day I saw the bluebird's wing
  Agleam upon a waving sea
  Of emerald-coloured timothy.
  We walked together--you and I--
  We saw the bluebird gliding by;
  He came so near--the mad, wild thing--
  We almost touched his sapphire wing,
  But ere across our path he flew
  He rose and vanished in the blue.

  To-day I saw the bluebird's wing;
  I heard wood-thrushes round me sing;
  Wind-blown across the April sky,
  Great swelling cloud-sails drifted by;
  And on the sky-line's silver sheen
  White birches danced in frills of green,
  And all the world was mad with spring.
  But you were miles and miles away;
  The bluebird's wing was dull and gray.




  THE ANSWER

  Why do I lie upon the ground
  And listen to the silver sound
  Of water flowing from a spring?
  It sings a song I cannot sing.

  Why am I gazing at the sky
  To watch the clouds go trailing by?
  --Pearl ships upon a sapphire sea--
  They seek a land unknown to me.

  Why do I listen to the song
  Of pine-boughs singing all day long?
  The secret that their songs unfold
  Ten thousand bards have left untold.




WILD GRAPE



  WILD GRAPE

  Beneath the crawling shadow
  Of a crumbling temple to gods long-forgotten,
  The wild grape twines amid the fragments
  Of shattered pillars prone upon the ground,
  And its dark leaves hide from sight the broken sculptures
  Of faun and youth and maiden,
  That once stood in the temple pediment,
  Young, naked, beautiful.
  In wild freedom it climbs over the carved acanthus
  leaves of the crumbling columns,
  And weaves a funeral wreath over their dead beauty.
  The wild bees hum and buzz
  Among the grape-flowers, heavy with honeyed perfume,
  Under the drowsy noonday sun,
  That spills its amber wine from a full goblet over the
        thirsting hillside.
  Wanton and wild,
  Like an unhappy lover
  Clinging to the breast of his dead mistress,
  The vine clings in voluptuous embrace
  About the naked, pallid forms,
  And mingles there with the eternal beauty
  Of youth and age
  And life and death.




  TO A GREEK STATUE

  Beautiful statue of Parian marble,
  Dreaming alone in the northern sunlight,
  Ivory-tinted, your slender arms beckon;
  I follow, I follow.

  Slender and white is your beautiful body,
  Gleaming against the gray walls that surround you;
  Like hyacinth-flowers beneath the snow sleeping
  Is the dream you emprison;--

  A dream of beauty that lingers forever,
  A dream of the amethyst sky of midnight,
  A dream of the jacinth blue of still waters,
  Reflecting white temples.

  Your white arms beckon, I follow, I follow,
  My dream goes forth with your dream to wander;
  You lead me into a moonlit garden
  Beside the AEgean.

  White in the moonlight gleams the temple
  Cutting the purple sky with its pediment;
  Diamonds and sapphires fall from the fountain;
  Black are the cypress trees.

  The gods are asleep in the silent temple;
  Only the lapping of waves on the sea-sand
  Mingles its drowsy rhythmical beating
  With the bells of the fountain.

  Soft lie the panther-skins on the cool grasses,
  Not in vain are your white arms lifted;
  And my dream of beauty and your dream eternal
  Embrace in the moonlight.




  OMNIPRESENCE

  What are the great pine boughs
  That stretch over me so lovingly
  Shielding me from the heat?
  They are the sheltering arms of God,
  Visible
  Against white drifting clouds.

  And the trailing white clouds,--
  What are they?
  They are the tattered, worn-out clothes,
  Bordered with broken pearls,
  Cast off by the angels and archangels,
  And by God himself.




  MY CATHEDRAL

  All my life long I have loved cathedrals;
  Their gray, mysterious vaults and arches
  Are the home of peace and beauty,
  And sometimes, too, of hope.
  Their roofs of stone and walls of painted glass
  Shut out the noisy world,
  And protect tired eyes from the glare of day.
  Their singing-boys and organs thrill lonely hearts;
  Their blue welling clouds of incense
  Bring a pungent smell as of burning flowers,
  And their gleaming candles
  Beckon like lights of home across the twilight.

  And now I have a cathedral all my own.
  It has great pine trunks for pillars,
  For painted windows red and golden leaves;
  White slender birches are the singing-boys,
  And the great organ the winds of God
  Playing among the pine-boughs.
  The prim little spruces are virgin nuns,
  Telling their beads in drops of dew;
  And the bare broken tree-stumps
  Are hooded monks shattered by worldly storms,
  But now in a safe refuge beneath my cathedral dome.
  The white-throated sparrows chant prime for me;
  The wood-thrush rings the vesper bell;
  From beds of fern roll perfumed clouds of incense;
  And from the great high altar of eternal rock,
  God himself looks forth
  In the red glory of the dawn.




  THE FOUNDRY

  Two monsters,
  Iron and Coal,
  Sleep in the darkness.
  A poisonous scarlet breath blows over them,
  And they awake hissing and writhing,
  And spew forth blood-red vomit
  In streams like fiery serpents.
  Then from the reeking pools
  A monstrous brood is born,
  Black, strong, beautiful.
  But we turn away our tired eyes,
  And try to find the sky above the smoke-clouds.




  SWISS SKETCHES

  I.--AFTER SUNSET ON JURA

  The Alps--
  A mighty string of pearls
  Which Day has laid aside--
  Flaunt their alluring beauty
  Upon the purple velvet of deep valleys,
  Until night,
  Stretching out black greedy fingers,
  Steals them one by one.


  II.--LUCERNE

  From staring eyes
  Of hotel windows,
  From flaunting rich
  And cringing poor,
  From men and women
  Drunken with wine, passion and money,
  From tired Cook's tourists
  Doing Switzerland on sixteen pounds,
  From shrieking steamers
  Tearing the shadow of Mount Pilatus into shreds,
  From bands beating out brazen music
  Under the twisted plane-trees,
  From all that is poor and rich and ugly,
  I lift my eyes unto the eternal hills
  Which are outlined upon orange and crimson
  By a Supreme Master with a brush of sunlight,
  And there my soul finds peace.


  III.--LAKE LEMAN

  Like the High Priest of Jehovah
  The lake, for the Festival of Beauty
  Puts upon its blue garment
  A gorgeous jewelled breast-plate bordered with gold.

  Behind the cloudy pillar glows a fire;
  My eyes can scarcely bear its glory,
  As it burns crimson and scarlet
  On jasper and flame-colored sard,
  On ruby, red as sunset flame,
  And topaz shot with golden lights.
  Like the eternal fire of distant stars--
  Blue, green and white,
  Gleam diamond, emerald, sapphire,
  Jacinth and beryl,
  Onyx and green-banded agate,
  And amethyst purple as wild iris-flowers.
  Morning and evening
  On the day of the great Festival
  The High Priest of Beauty wears his jewelled breastplate,
  And the chosen people, blinded by its glory,
  Bow down and worship.




  VISIONS

  I.

  I saw a vision of beauty.
  My eyes looked through the mists of ages,
  Back to the glorious years when Beauty itself was God.
  And I saw the waves of the blue AEgean,
  Turquoise, sapphire, jacinth and amethyst mingled,
  And I heard the singing of the water,
  As of playing of distant pipes
  By slender shepherd lads among the hills.
  Then I turned away from the shore
  And I saw the pediment of a great temple
  Standing white against the sky,
  And beneath the pediment rows of marble columns
  Like giant trees in a forest of frozen beauty.
  Statues gleamed amid the dark foliage of cypress and olive trees,
  Statues of gods and goddesses, youths and maidens,
  Horses of ruddy bronze and chariots of beaten brass.
  My feet trod the steps of the marble stairway,
  And I went a worshipper to the great temple,
  Whose burnished doors stood wide ajar
  Gleaming like the portal of a dream city;
  I lifted my arms in adoration,
  And my soul drank its fill
  From the pure Greek fountain-head of beauty.


  II.

  I saw a vision of faith.
  My eyes were turned to a mediaeval city
  Of crowded low-roofed houses,
  From which there rose a great cathedral,
  With walls of chiselled stone
  And spires that pierced into the blue.
  Here men had wrought with hands and heart and brain
  Long years in wood and stone,
  Until they reared a gorgeous temple to do honour to their God.
  I entered in,

  And saw the walls agleam with painted glass,
  More brilliant than the jewels of eastern kings;
  I heard the organ like winds sweeping across the sea,
  And the voices of the singing-boys
  Like soft ripples on the velvet sand.
  With golden cross and smoking censers
  And priests in robes of scarlet and purple,
  The procession passed along;
  Then the great sweating throng
  Bowed low upon the stony floor before the Host,
  And when the echoing music
  Had vanished in the soaring vault above,
  The crowd went forth from the gorgeous gloom
  Comforted, into the golden sun-light.
  My soul, too, was comforted,
  For it had drunk deep
  From the pure mediaeval well of faith.


  III.

  I saw a vision of love.
  Upon the field of battle
  Amid dust and smoke and shrouds of poisonous vapour
  Red streams of youthful blood were poured upon the ground,
  Generously,
  Joyfully,
  That the world might not die from its festering wounds,
  But might drink health and life
  From these pure, youthful streams.
  Then I stood awed and dumb,
  For here was love supreme.


  IV.

  I saw a vision of death.
  Silence held my feet with clinging hands,
  And Darkness put heavy fingers across my eyes.
  Then Darkness raised her hands, and I saw in the gray shadows
  A great night-moth with sable folded wings;
  It seemed asleep upon a purple flower,
  But as I watched,
  Slowly it spread its wings,
  And from them shone a gleam of crimson dawn,
  And all the world was drenched in showers of light.
  Then with his flaming wings outspread
  The great moth sailed away,
  Like a scarlet boat upon a dawn-swept sea,
  Leaving behind a wake of golden light.
  And I know that my vision of death
  Was only a vision of beauty.




  JAPANESE PRINTS

  I.--THE LADY WITH THE YELLOW FAN

  O little lady with the yellow fan
  Why are you so sad?
  Why does a tear stand
  Like a tea-flower bud upon your cheek?
  Your dress is of blue and scarlet silk,
  Your slippers are embroidered with gems,
  A gold and emerald butterfly has lighted in your hair,
  Your serving-maid stands near
  Awaiting your command,
  And if you lifted but one slender finger
  A chariot would come and carry you away to your father's palace.
  Why are you so sad?

  It is because the ships beside the shore
  Spread their dark sails to the sea-blowing breeze;
  The tide is high, and soon will set toward the distant islands,
  And there is a gleam of swords and armour,
  For the soldiers go to war beyond the seas.


  II.--CAGED BIRDS

  There are yellow birds within the cage;
  Beside its gilded bars there stand the women
  Whom the Great Prince loves to honour.
  They wear silken robes and jewels in their hair,
  And live in a pretty pink and yellow house.
  But the women look not at the captive singing-birds,
  Nor listen to their song,
  Their eyes follow the flight of two white-breasted doves,
  Winging their way towards the wind-torn clouds.


  III.--WISTERIA

  Why do you peer at me, old man,
  With eyes half shut,
  From underneath the purple lanterns of your wisteria vine?
  Your face is but a mask,
  Showing neither joy nor sorrow;
  But I know you bend your head to listen
  When the wild geese go honking towards the south,
  And your eyes grow wide with sadness,
  When the last petal falls from the wisteria flower.
  You, too, love beauty,
  Or else why twine the purple wisteria about your door-posts,
  Or pin a yellow gem upon your lilac gown?




  A VENETIAN PALACE

  In quivering translucent light,
  Her head resting upon the blue pillow of the sky,
  Her feet upon the floor of the smoke-blue water,
  Sleeps Beauty,
  Turned to stone by a miracle of art.
  And though she never stirs,
  But slumbers on in a worn and faded robe
  Rose-colored and bordered with old lace of ivory white,
  We come from far-off cities,
  And we turn to her our hungry eyes,
  Even away from sunlit sky and sea.




  JAPANESE IRIS

  A great prince of the ancient days
  Once loved a little geisha girl,
  Who wore a silken robe,
  Blue as the waters of the lily-pond.
  But the Great Prince was sent to a distant island,
  And the little geisha girl
  Never put on her robe of blue again.

  And you, O purple iris with the golden bands,
  Are the soul of the Great Prince;
  And you, O slender one,
  Blue as lapis lazuli,
  Are the soul of the little dancing-girl;
  And you nestle at last
  Beside your stately purple Prince,
  Here in the sunshine of my northern garden.




  JAPANESE LOVE-SONGS

  (_In the Hokku manner_)

  I.

  The white lotus-flower
  Grows in the depths of the pool,
  Love grows in my heart.

  II.

  The peony flames crimson.
  My heart's blood is far redder
  Than its flame.

  III.

  Sere iris leaves and dead blossoms.
  Mist and drizzle of rain.
  Where art thou?

  IV.

  Darkness.  Shadows in my soul.
  The vision of your face.
  Dawn and music.

  V.

  Hush of night.  Perfumed breath of night.
  A moth with flaming wings.
  Come beloved.




  CUPS OF JADE

  The mists lie along the iris-purple valleys;
  The little wooden bridge,
  Where the waterfall rings its silver bells,
  Is a bow of darkness;
  The dust of the highway is gray as ashes under our feet;
  A cloud of night-birds
  Dots the orange sky.

  All day our paths have led us side by side
  Along the steep hot highways.
  It is cool evening now,
  And the temple bells call you one way
  And the silence calls me another.

  We come to the white door-posts of your house,
  We leave our dusty shoes beside the little pool among the iris leaves.
  We sit upon woven mats and you give me tea to drink
  From a cup of sea-green jade.
  Now is my tongue heavy with thoughts I cannot utter,
  For I know that to-morrow
  My path will not lead over the steep hill,
  Nor yours down to the deep valley,
  For we have drunk together from cups of sea-green jade.




  THE LOON'S CRY

  Outside the tent
  Darkness and giant trees swaying in the wind.
  The lake is moaning in its troubled sleep.
  And far across the lazy lapping waves,
  Above the crooning of the wind,
  I hear a wild loon crying,
  Like a weary soul alone on the dark water.

  Inside the tent
  Your gentle breathing,
  Untroubled by crooning wind or wailing loon;
  Your face is lighted by the embers of the fire.

  Fainter and farther away echoes the loon's cry,
  But now it is only the voice of Loneliness
  Bidding me farewell,
  As it passes away into the night.

  You stir in your sleep softly
  And turn your face to me,--
  And the loon cries no more.




  PRAYER

  I.

  A wind-bell hung at the gateway of an ancient temple
  And played the music taught it by the wind,
  At times soft, like bubbles breaking in a fountain,
  When the breeze of summer night caressed it,
  Then loud and jangling when the typhoon swept across the sea,
  Or low and moaning when the temple gongs sounded for prayer.
  And the people,
  Who never heard the music of the wind,
  Paused to listen to the wind-bell,
  And then passed on through the temple gate,
  With music echoing in their ears.

  O Maker of all music,
  Let me be as the wind-bell by the temple.


  II.

  Beyond the temple gate
  A gleaming pool lay among the iris leaves.
  At dawn it glowed like a great rose upon the garden's breast,
  At sunset flamed like a crimson peony.
  And the people,
  Who never lifted up their eyes to see the beauty of the sky,
  Would linger as they passed from prayer
  To watch the sunrise or the sunset fade upon the pool,
  And then turn their steps to the gray dusty streets,
  With rose and gold and crimson in their eyes.

  O Maker of all beauty,
  Let me be as the iris-bordered pool.





  Warwick Bro's & Rutter, Limited,
  Printers and Bookbinders, Toronto, Canada.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Acanthus and Wild Grape, by F. O. Call

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ACANTHUS AND WILD GRAPE ***

***** This file should be named 33552.txt or 33552.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/5/5/33552/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
