The Project Gutenberg EBook of In a Belgian Garden, by F. O. Call

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: In a Belgian Garden
       and Other Poems

Author: F. O. Call

Release Date: August 27, 2010 [EBook #33553]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN A BELGIAN GARDEN ***




Produced by Al Haines









IN A BELGIAN GARDEN

AND OTHER POEMS


BY

F. O. CALL





LONDON

ERSKINE MACDONALD, LTD.

MCMXVII




TO

E. H. G.

THE BEST OF FRIENDS

THIS LITTLE BOOK IS AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED




Author's Note

Many of the poems in this volume have appeared before in various
publications and I wish to thank the editors of the "Canadian
Magazine," the "University Magazine," the "Westminster," the "Canada
West," and other periodicals for permission to reprint these verses.

F. O. C.

BISHOP'S COLLEGE,
  LENNOXVILLE, CANADA.




Contents

  INTRODUCTION
  IN A BELGIAN GARDEN
  A LINCOLNSHIRE MAIDEN
  HIDDEN TREASURE
  A RIVER SUNSET
  THE MADONNA
  AN IDOL IN A SHOP WINDOW
  THROUGH A LONG CLOISTER
  THE CHAMBLY RAPID
  THE SNOWDRIFT
  ON MOUNT ROYAL
  THE VISION
  A YEAR AGO
  ETERNITY
  THE OLD SCHOOL BELL
  ON A SWISS MOUNTAIN
  RHEIMS
  THE MYSTIC
  A SONG OF THE HOMELAND
  THE FROZEN BROOK
  THE INDIFFERENT ONES
  IN A FOREST
  THE SHIPS OF MEMORY
  THE OBELISK
  THE PARTING WAYS
  CALVARY
  THE GOLDEN BOWL
  THE LACE-MAKER OF BRUGES




Introduction

Most of the poems contained in this collection are of recent date,
though their author--who is at present Professor of Modern Languages at
Bishop's College, Quebec--has written verse from his childhood.  He is
the first Canadian writer to be included in this series, and is as
affectionately loyal to the Motherland as to his native country, as may
be gathered from his "Song of the Homeland."  His verse has already
earned a considerable reputation in Canada, in whose Press much of it
has appeared.  Educated at Stanstead College, he took his degree at the
University where he now lectures, and has also studied in Paris,
Marburg and Switzerland.  Several of his poems are concerned with the
sorrow and the ravished beauty of Belgium: a circumstance not
surprising, as he has travelled much in that country, as well as in
France, Switzerland and Italy.  A lover of country life and a disciple
of the cult of the open road, he revels in the joys of camping and
canoeing, as one of his poems, "Hidden Treasure," bears witness.  In
this little book, and more especially in the "Song of the Homeland," he
shows us the maple leaf entwined, strongly as ever, with the English
rose of the Mother country.

S. GERTRUDE FORD.




  In a Belgian Garden

  Once in a Belgian garden,
    (Ah, many months ago!)
  I saw like pale Madonnas
    The tall white lilies blow.

  Great poplars swayed and trembled
    Afar against the sky,
  And green with flags and rushes
    The river wandered by.

  Amid the waving wheatfields
    Glowed poppies blazing red,
  And showering strange wild music
    A lark rose overhead.

      *    *    *    *    *

  The lark has ceased his singing,
    The wheat is trodden low,
  And in the blood-stained garden
    No more the lilies blow.

  And where green poplars trembled
    Stand shattered trunks instead,
  And lines of small white crosses
    Keep guard above the dead.

  For here brave lads and noble,
    From lands beyond the deep,
  Beneath the small white crosses
    Have laid them down to sleep.

  They laid them down with gladness
    Upon the alien plain,
  That this same Belgian garden
    Might bud and bloom again.




  A Lincolnshire Maiden

  Long the eastern beaches,
    Where brown the seaweed grows,
  And over broad salt meadows,
    The green tide ebbs and flows.

  Above the low-roofed houses,
    Two ancient towers rise,
  And stand like giant druids,
    Against the wind-swept skies.

  Through mist or rain or sunshine,
    Their prows festooned with foam,
  The fishing-boats go outward
    Or laden, turn them home.

  She watches by the window,
    And tearless are her eyes;
  She sees not church or tower,
    Or sea or wind-swept skies.

  She sees not tide or tempest,
    Or sun or mist or rain;
  Afar her spirit wanders
    Upon the Belgian plain.

  Where over shell-scarred cities
    The mad, red tempest raves,
  And poplars sigh and shudder
    Above unnumbered graves.




  Hidden Treasure

  Sun-browned boy with the wondering eyes,
  Do you see the blue of the summer skies?
  Do you hear the song of the drowsy stream,
  As it winds by the shore where the birches gleam?
  Then come, come away
  From the shadowy bay,
  And we'll drift with the stream where the rapids play;
  For we are two pirates, fierce and bold,
  And we'll capture the hoard of the morning's gold.

  A roving craft is our red canoe,
  O pirate chief with the eyes of blue;
  So hoist your flag with the skull on high,
  And out we'll sail where the treasures lie.
  For in days of old
  Came pirates bold,
  a Spanish galleon's captured gold;
  And their boat was wrecked on the river strand
  And its treasures strewn on the silver sand.

  Now steady all as we dash along,
  The rapids are swift but our paddles are strong;
  And soon we'll drift with the water's flow
  Where the treasure lies hid in the shallows below,
  Oh, cool and dim,
  'Neath its foam-flecked brim,
  Is the pool where the swallows dip and skim;
  So we'll plunge by the prow of our red canoe
  For the treasure that lies in the quivering blue.

  Now home once more to the shadowy bay,
  For we've captured the gold of the summer's day,
  And emeralds green from the banks along,
  And the silver bars of the white-throat's song.
  No pirates bore
  Such a glittering store
  From the treasure ships of the days of yore,
  As the spoils we have won on the shining stream,
  While we drifted along in a golden dream.




  A River Sunset

  Red sunlight fades from wood and town,
    The western sky is crimson-dyed,
  Gaunt shadow-ships drift silent down
    Upon the river's gleaming tide.

  The hills' clear outlines melt away
    Or veil themselves in purple light,
  And burning thoughts that vexed the day
    Become fair visions of the night.




  The Madonna

  She shivered and crouched in the immigrant shed
    In the midst of the surging crowd;
  Her hands were warped with the years of toil,
    And her young form bent and bowed.

  Her eyes looked forth with a frightened glance
    At the throng that round her pressed;
  But her face was the face of the Mother of God
    As she looked at the babe on her breast.




  An Idol in a Shop Window

  Old Lohan peers through the dusty glass,
    From a jumble of curios quaint and rare;
  And he watches the hurrying crowds that pass
    The whole day long, through the ancient square.

  Wrapped in his robe of gold and jade,
    Here by the window he patiently waits
  For the sound that the gongs and the conches made,
    In the days of old at the temple gates.

  He heaves no sighs and he sheds no tears,
    For his heart is bronze, and he does not know
  That his temple has been for a thousand years
    But a mound of dust where the bamboos grow.

  So here he sits through the nights and days,
    And the sun goes up and down the sky;
  But he often looks with a wistful gaze
    At the crowds that always pass him by.

  And his eyes half closed in a mystic dream
    Of his poppy-land of long ago,
  Turn back to the shores of the sacred stream
    And the kneeling throng he used to know.

  But he sometimes smiles as he sees the crowd
    Of human folk that pass him by;
  Then he wraps himself in his mystic shroud,--
    And the sun once more goes down the sky.




  Through a Long Cloister

  Through a long cloister where the gloom of night
    Lingers in sombre silence all the day,
    Across worn pavements crumbling to decay
  We wandered, blindly groping for the light.
  A door swung wide, and splendour infinite
    Streamed through the painted glass, and drove away
    The lingering gloom from choir, nave and bay,
  And a great minster's glory met our sight.

  Blindly along life's cloister do we grope,
    We seek a gate that leads to life immortal,
      We see it loom before us dim and vast,
  And doubt's dark shadows veil the light of hope:
    When lo, Death's hand flings wide the sombre portal,
      And light unfading meets our gaze at last.




  The Chambly Rapid

  There's a spirit in the rapid, calling, calling through the night,
  There's a gleam upon the water, burning pale and burning bright.
  Woe to him who hears the calling!  Woe to him who sees the light!


    My son and I had left St. Jean,
      Our paddles dipping in the blue,
    And many miles to north had gone
      Along the silent Richelieu;
    The night came down, we thought of rest;
    A threatening cloud hung in the west.

    No warning sound the river made
      Save for the rapid's muffled roar,
    As 'neath the pine-trees' deepening shade
      We camped upon that luckless shore;
    No sound the night-wind bore to me
    Save one weird echo from Chambly.

    The night grew dark and darker still,
      The pale-faced moon was hid from sight,
    When o'er the waters black and chill
      We saw a ghastly, gleaming light,---
    A fitful fire, pale and blue,
    That burned my inmost spirit through.

    And like some baleful gleaming eye
      It shone beneath night's heavy pall;
    Then high above the loon's lone cry
      Afar we heard the spirit call;
    It called us from the other shore.
    Ah, Jean will never hear it more!

    I could not seize or hold him back,
      For while the light burned pale and blue,
    A heavy hand from out the black
      Held me beside my own canoe,
    And ere I stirred, the other barque
    Had silent sped into the dark.

    Adown the river's drifting tide
      To where the wild, mad rapids run,
    Past pine-trees towering on each side
      His frail canoe had drifted on;
    He did not look to left or right
    But gazed upon that hell-born light.

    And ever swifter with the flow
    He drifted where the rapids play,
    His eyes still on that awful glow;
    Ah, God! my life seemed snatched away!
    I saw a gleam far up the sky
    And heard the echo of a cry.


  There's a spirit in the rapid, calling, calling through the night,
  There's a gleam upon the water, burning pale and burning bright.
  Woe to him who hears the calling!  Woe to him who sees the light!




  The Snowdrift

  The snowflakes fell on a mountain peak,
  Where the rocks were bare and the winds were bleak,
  And at first they clung to the mountain's breast,
  But soon they fell from its lofty crest,
  And stained and soiled was the new-born snow
  When it reached the valley far down below.

  But up on the height one drift alone
  Still firmly clung to the rugged stone,
  And men in the gloomy vale below
  Looked up and gazed on the shining snow,
  And their darkened souls drank in the light
  From the gleaming snow on the mountain height.

  Unstained by the grime of the earthly vale,
  Its white breast firm in the strongest gale,
  It bravely clung to its lofty height
  And gleamed afar with its glorious light,
  Till kissed by the sun and the summer rain,
  It rose in mist to the skies again.




  On Mount Royal

  I climb its sides when the day grows old
    And its mighty shadow falls deep and wide,
  And over the gleam of the sunset's gold
    The darkness creeps like a rising tide;
  And higher and higher up rocky height,
    Past oaks that are gnarled by the winter's blast,
  I climb till a marvellous vision of light
    Breaks forth on my wondering sight at last.

  Dome and spire of house of prayer,
    Convent cloister gloomy and gray,
  Street and market and bridge lie there
    In the golden gleam of the dying day.
  Yet here on the silent mountain crest
    There echoes a moan and a smothered roar
  From the tide of life in its strange unrest,
    As it beats below on a barren shore.




  The Vision

  A vision came unto a saint of old
    Of a fair city by a crystal stream,
  Its gates of pearl, its streets of shining gold,--
    Barbaric splendours of a mystic's dream.
  There upon floating wings the white-robed throng
  No man can number chant in endless song;
  Across the tideless sea no shadow falls
  To dim the glory of the sapphire walls,
  Or mar the splendour of the throne-crowned height.

  Ah love, the mystic's vision wakes to-night,
  With all its glittering show and kingly pride,
  No longing in a heart unsatisfied.
  But oh, to walk with thee the river shore
  As in the days gone by, the gold strewn o'er
  The strand of primrose bloom, the water's flow,
  Mingled with thy sweet voice in music low,
  The angel song; to touch my lips to thine,
  To hear the whispering of thy heart to mine,
  And burning with a fire that never dies,
  To see once more the love-light in thine eyes.

  Ah, dim those far celestial splendours burn,
    Gray grow the sapphire walls and gold-strewn ways
  Before the vision of thy love's return
    With all the unuttered joys of bygone days.




  A Year Ago

  The waters of the river gleamed as brightly
    And murmured with the same untiring flow,
  The branches of the birches tossed as lightly,
    Among them sang the breeze as soft and low,
          A year ago.

  We sat beneath the white-stemmed birches bending
    To reach the gurgling waters of the bay,
  We saw the boats their courses seaward wending,
    And earth seemed fair,--before us life's long day,
          Night far away.

  But often clouds would veil the sunlight over,
    A moment cast a shadow and float by;
  So stealthily above our hearts would hover
    Sad thoughts to pause a moment, pass and die,
          We knew not why.

  We heeded not the moaning of the river,
    Nor did the wind a whispered message bring;
  Ah, now I know they murmured--part forever!
    For that dull gloom above us hovering,
          Was Death's dark wing.




  Eternity

  Eternity thou dark unbounded sea,
    Upon whose tide we drift into the night,
    One moment let us with our mortal sight
  Pierce through the fogs and know thy mystery.
  Voiceless thou art and voiceless wilt thou be,
    Across thy still, cold deeps there comes no light,
    While age and aeon or a moment's flight
  Pass on as one and vanish lost in thee.

  Yet onward driven must our frail barques go,
    Though through the night no beacon gleams afar,
    And storm-clouds hide the steadfast guiding-star;
  The purpose of our wandering and our woe,
    A tide that wafts to some safe harbour bar,
  O God, that we might know, might only know!




  The Old School Bell

  I can hear it calling, calling, sounding on the morning breeze,
    As so often I have heard it call before,
  And its ringing thrills my spirit as the wind the whispering trees,
    But alas, I know for me it calls no more.
      Ah, how sweet the memory lingers!
      Though old Time's relentless fingers
  Oft have turned the glass while flowed the sands away,
    Yet I'd give the dearest treasure
    Hardly gained from Fortune's measure,
  Could I be a boy again for one short day.

  I can see the gleaming river 'mid the willows winding blue,
    I can hear the schoolboys shouting by the shore,
  Then the bell begins its calling, echoing the valley through,
    And the schoolboys turn toward the chapel door:
      Laggard footsteps, scarcely creeping,
      To the bell's low tolling keeping
  Measured tread, as oft before my own have done;
    Ah, the longing ceasing never
    For a part in life's endeavour,
  And to-day I count the gains that I have won!

  I can hear it calling, calling, though its tongue no longer swings,
    For within my heart its notes are ringing free,
  As with silent step before me, Memory the old scene brings
    And I think the old bell's voice is calling me.
      Then I see the old loved faces
      Grouped about their wonted places,
  As the boyish voices chant their song of praise;
    Gone all thought of joy or sorrow,
    Loss to-day or gain to-morrow,
  And I live again the life of other days.




  On a Swiss Mountain

  Lad, the mighty hills are calling,
    Hills of promise gleaming bright,
  And the floods of sunshine falling
    Fill their deepest vales with light.

  There the young dawn's golden fire
    Beckons to a brighter day,
  Untrod paths of youths' desire,
    Heights unconquered far away.

  Steep and dark and spectre-haunted
    Winds the pathway to the height;
  Sturdy youth with heart undaunted
    Deems the toiling short and light.

  Short or long, an easy Master,
    Gives each tired toiler rest,
  Counts not failure or disaster
    If the striving be the best.

  Go lad, go, 'tis Life that calls you,
    Mates of old must soothe their pain,
  Mindless of whate'er befalls you
    If but honour still remain.




  Rheims

  In royal splendour rose the house of prayer,
    Its mystic gloom arched over by the flight
    Of soaring vault; above the nave's dim night
  Rich gleamed the painted windows wondrous fair.
  Sweet chimes and chanting mingled in the air;
    Blue clouds of incense dimmed the vaulted height;
    And on the altar, like a beacon light,
  The gold cross glittered in the candles' glare.

  To-day no bells, no choirs, no incense cloud,
    For thou, O Rheims, art prey of evil powers;
  But with a voice a thousand times more loud
    Than siege-guns echoing round thy shattered towers,
  Do thy mute bells to all the world proclaim
  Thy martyred glory and thy foeman's shame.




  The Mystic

  The mystic sits by the sacred stream
    Watching the sun as it mounts the sky;
  And life to him is a haunting dream
    Or a dim, weird pageant passing by.

  Sorrow and joy go on their way,
    Passion and lust and love and hate;
  Only a band of mummers they,
    Blindly led by the hand of fate.

  Though the pageant is real, himself the dream,
    Though men are born and strive and die,
  Yet the mystic sits by the sacred stream
    Watching the sun go down the sky.




  A Song of the Homeland

  I'll sing you a song of the Homeland,
    Though the strains be of little worth,
  A song of our own loved Homeland,
    Of the noblest land upon earth;
  Where the tide of the sea from oceans three
    Beats high in its triple might,
  Where the winds are born in a southern morn
    And die in a polar night.

  I'll sing you a song of the Eastland,
    Of the land where our fathers died,
  Where Saxon and Frank, their feuds long dead,
    Are sleeping side by side;
  Where their sons still toil on the hard-won soil
    Of the mighty river plain,
  Where the censer swings and the Angelus rings,
    And the old faith lives again.

  I'll sing you a song of the Westland
    Where the magic cities rise,
  And the prairies clothed with their golden grain
    Stretch under the azure skies;
  Where the mountains grim in the clouds grow dim
    Far north in the arctic land,
  And the northern light in its mystic flight
    Flares over the golden strand.

  And I'll sing of the _men_ of the Homeland
    From the north and east and west,
  The men that go to the Homeland's call,
    (Ah, God we have given our best!)
  But not in vain are our heroes slain
    If under the darkened skies,
  All hand in hand from strand to strand
    A sin-purged nation rise.




  The Frozen Brook

  The winter woods lie gray and still
    Beneath the dreary sunless skies,
  The brook that rippled down the hill
    In summer hours, all silent lies.

  And though its breast by ice is bound,
    By bending low and listening long,
  I hear a faint and far-off sound--
    The echo of a summer song.

  O weary heart, though cold and drear
    The days along thy pathway seem,
  To Nature's breast bend low thine ear
    And listen to its pulsing stream.




  The Indifferent Ones

  Unmoved they sit by the stream of life
    And its blood-red tide to the sea goes down,
  While the hosts are borne through the surging strife
    To a hero's death and a martyr's crown.

  They pay no toll of their gold or blood;
    For them 'tis a pageant and naught beside;
  So they calmly dream by the reeking flood,
    While the sun goes down in the crimson tide.




  In a Forest

  Silver birch and dusky pine,
  Reaching up to find the light
  From the forest's gloomy night,
  From the thicket where entwine
  Stunted shrub and creeping vine,
  From the damp where witch-fire glows
  And the poison fungus grows,
  High you lift your heads, O trees,
  To the kisses of the breeze,
  To the far-off sapphire sky,
  To the clouds that pass you by,
  To the sun that shines on high.

  From the dusk of earthly night
  Strive, O soul, to reach the light.




  The Ships of Memory

  The silent ships of memory creep
    Across the seas of long ago;
  Like phantoms, on a tideless deep,
    Their pale prows wander to and fro.

  Some bear the dreams of happy years
    Or bring a cargo all of gold;
  Some bear a freight of useless tears,
    For love and sorrow long untold.

  And each man takes the proffered dower
    For golden grain or bitter loss;
  O, happy he that hath the power
    To take the gold and leave the dross.




  The Obelisk

  (Place de la Concorde, Paris)

  There rise the palace walls as fair to-day,
    As when with arms and banners gleaming bright,
    The pageantry of royal pomp and might
  Passed through the guarded gates and went its way.
  The blue, translucent beams of morning play
    On arch triumphal, veiled in silver light;
    And here, where blind, red fury reached its height,
  An ancient column rises grim and gray.

  Slumbering in mystic sleep it seems to be,
    And dreaming dreams of Egypt long ago,
    Unmindful of the ceaseless ebb and flow
  About its feet of life's unresting sea;
    But 'mid the roar, I hear it murmur low:
  Poor fools, they know not all is vanity!




  The Parting Ways

  We trod together pleasant ways;
    The earth was fair and blue the sky;
  Clear were the nights and bright the days
    And life was joy, for you were nigh.

  To-day the road looks steep and grim,
    And shadows fall on every side,
  The sun grows strangely blurred and dim--
    For in this place our paths divide.




  Calvary

  The women stood and watched while thick, black night
    Enclosed the awful tragedy.  Afar
    Three crosses stood, against a single bar
  Of crimson-glowing, black-encircled light.
  No hint of Easter dawn.  In all the height
    Of that dark heaven, not a single star
    To whisper;--Love and Life the victors are.
  It seemed to them that wrong had conquered right.

  O ye who watch and wait, the night is long.
    A curtain of spun fire and woven gloom
      Across the mighty tragedy is drawn.
  But soon your ears shall hear a triumph song,
    And golden light shall touch each sacred tomb,
      And voices shout at last--The Dawn!  The Dawn!




  The Golden Bowl

  On seeing a picture of a boy gazing at a golden bowl,
  which, among Eastern nations, was a symbol of life.

  In a dream he seems to lie
    Gazing at the golden bowl,
  Where dim visions passing by
    Whisper vaguely to his soul.

  Restless phantoms come and go
    Crowned with cypress or with bays;
  Sad or merry, swift or slow,
    Tread they through the mystic maze.

  Still the pageant winds along,
    Youth and age and love and lust,
  Till at last the motley throng
    Fades and crumbles into dust.

  All in vain upon the bowl
    Gaze the wondering, boyish eyes;
  He shall read its hidden scroll
    Only when it shattered lies.

  For a wondrous light shall gleam
  From the scattered fragments born.
  Boy, dream on, for life's a dream,
  Followed by a golden morn.




  The Lace-Maker of Bruges

  Her age-worn hands upon her apron lie
    Idle and still.  Against the sunset glow
    Tall poplars stand and silent barges go
  Along the green canal that wanders by.
  A lean, red finger pointing to the sky,
    The spire of Notre Dame.  Above a row
  Of dim, gray arches where the sunbeams die,
    The ancient belfry guards the square below.

  One August eve she stood in that same square
    And gazed and listened, proud beneath her tears,
      To see her soldier passing down the street.
  To-night the beat of drums and trumpets' blare
    With bursts of fiendish music smite her ears,
      And mingle with the tread of trampling feet.




W. BRENDON AND SON, LTD., PRINTERS, PLYMOUTH, ENGLAND









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of In a Belgian Garden, by F. O. Call

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN A BELGIAN GARDEN ***

***** This file should be named 33553.txt or 33553.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/5/5/33553/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
